[Music]
I recruited this guy from scratch. He
had been a member of a bonafide
terrorist group and he had a very
specific telltale crimp.
>> What's a crimp?
>> A crimp is a certain way that you twist
the wires inside a bomb.
>> I heard that the agency is dabbling in
VR and AR type stuff.
>> Oh yeah. What the CIA is doing on
futuristic tech with things like virtual
reality are closer now to what DARPA is
doing and it is
terrifying.
The CIA has developed technologies to
for example remotely take over your car.
Why would the CIA want to take over your
car? To make you drive off a bridge. Now
working with the likes of Palunteer,
Nvidia, all these cutting edge tech
companies. I remember hearing when
Palanteer first came out that people at
the agency didn't like it
>> at all.
>> Do they use it now, you think?
>> Yeah.
>> What would they use it for?
>> Oh, all kinds of stuff. Mostly mo well.
>> Israelis are not like anybody else. They
killed a guy in a hotel room in Dubai
and then after they killed him, they
were somehow able to lock the door from
the inside of the hotel room.
You know, we studied that for a long
time.
>> There was like 26 people that the Dubai
CCTV footage saw it, but none of them
were picked up. No.
>> Weren't the cameras Israeli made?
>> I got a tour of the whole facility and
the cameras were German.
>> What facility?
>> There's an underground.
>> What has been your experience with
ground branch and special activities?
Those guys on loan from Seal Team 6,
they just appeared one day and then they
would vanish for a week at a time. What
they do is so secret. I have a feeling
people would really want me to ask you
about this. This freaks me out. Oh, I
got chills just thinking about it.
>> We have a lot to talk about.
>> Okay.
>> Um, so yeah, dude, thank you for coming
back.
>> No, it's my pleasure. You're a great
interviewer.
>> Thank you. Thank you.
>> You really are.
>> We're getting there, man. Well, yeah.
You just, you know, I'm trying to get a
little better every time and just do my
best and keep my mouth shut. I think
that's
>> that's the key.
>> Yeah. But um but yeah, dude, thank you
so much for for coming back. It's
>> always a pleasure.
>> Wonderful to have you and we'll have to
do it. We'll have to keep doing it for
sure.
>> Definitely. But um so yeah, John, for
people that didn't see the first
interview that we did um and and maybe
aren't familiar with your story, you
spent 15 years at the CIA, spent some
time in analysis, spent some time in
operations as a case officer or a spy
and later as the head of counterter
terrorism in Pakistan for CIA where you
captured Abda. We went through that full
story in the uh the last podcast. Um,
you're also a senior investigator with
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
under Kerry, which we didn't talk about.
Maybe we will today if we have the time.
>> And you blew the whistle on the enhanced
interrogation program or colloquially
known as the torture program
>> and went to prison for it. So, yeah,
dude. I uh like I was just telling you a
second ago, I watched our last interview
back and there's a lot of threads that I
would have pulled on being that that was
my very first interview that I ever
conducted that uh that I didn't at that
point. and that I will today. So, yeah,
dude. I'm I've been super excited to
have you back. Me, too. And thank you
for coming.
>> It's great to see you.
>> It's great to see you. So, um let's uh
if you could start maybe by kind of
laying out like for again for people
that may not have seen the last one, can
you explain what the role of an
operations officer is because we're
going to be talking about, you know, the
CIA and espionage and tradecraft and all
the fun stuff. You know, that that's
that's a good basic starting point. And
most people don't ask me, but the the
role of a case officer, also called an
operations officer, also called a CATB
officer, is
historically very simple. It is to
recruit spies to steal secrets so that
the CIA can analyze those secrets and
give the analysis to the policy makers,
the president, the vice president, the
secretaries of state and defense, the
national security adviser, so that they
can make the best informed policy. So
really, your job is simply to recruit
spies to steal secrets. That's that's
all that it is. And it's way harder than
it may sound. way harder because look at
it this way too. You have to get people
to commit espionage for you or in some
cases to commit treason for you which in
many countries is a death penalty
offense just cuz they really like being
around you. I mean that's how it starts.
It starts just with the basics of a
relationship and it it morphs into
money, usually money, ideology, revenge,
excitement, stuff like that. But usually
it's because they like being around you
and they know you're going to give them
money.
I would say 94 or 95% of the time that's
the case. M.
>> So yeah, we started talking about that
last time around some of the motivations
for an agent to spy and you kind of
finding that crack in their personality
and working on making it
>> and and for for the vernacular an agent
is not so a lot of people we should
clarify this one because we will be
using it but yeah a lot of people refer
to CIA officers as agents which is
incorrect.
>> Incorrect. Yeah.
The CIA employee is a CIA officer. The
agent is the person that you recruit to
do whatever it is you need to have done.
>> So, so yeah, I I would like to to cover
some things like chronologically because
like I said, when I watched the last
interview back, that's how we did it.
And I was I was thinking I had this guy
uh Scott Payne in. Are you familiar with
him? He's he was an FBI agent
undercover. I know how much you love the
FBI.
>> Yeah, we're we're like this.
>> Yeah. Um Scott's a good dude. But um he
infiltrated the the Outlaws biker gang.
>> Ooh.
>> And he got
>> gig.
>> Yeah. And he got strip searched at
gunpoint in a basement while he was
wearing a wire.
>> Oh my god.
>> Long story short, they ended up not
finding it. It was like sewn in his
clothes. He didn't say. But anyway, what
I'm thinking is for a undercover FBI
agent, that is worst case scenario.
>> Yeah. for a for a CIA officer, you you
recruit an agent for six, nine months
and then you pitch him and he absolutely
freaks out and says, "I'm going to
report to the authorities."
>> Yes.
>> Which happens,
>> right? So, at the farm, was there any
like fun scenarios like that that they
set up that you can tell us about?
>> Yeah. Well, yes and no. I mean, they set
it up so that the recruitment is going
to be successful. In fact, when I
pitched my instructor, he was pretending
to be I forget what
the owner of a chemical company or
something like that. I pitched him and
afterwards we were at the officer's club
having drinks and I said, "Man, I was so
nervous. I know it's just training, but
I was so nervous." And he said, "Oh,
come on." He said, "I practically
recruited myself. You have to act more
quickly and more decisively." And I
said, I said, "Okay, that I would." and
I did in real life. And then I'll tell
you, I ran into one of the other
instructors just weeks after I had made
my very first recruitment. I was back at
headquarters for consultations and I ran
into him in the cafeteria and he said,
"How's how's everything going in
Athens?" And I said, "Oh man, I got to
tell you, I made my first recruitment
and it was exactly like training.
Exactly no differences." And he said,
"Good. That's what we wanted it to be."
Yeah.
>> So when you say like you have to act uh
in that case like more quick and
decisive, how like um how different do
you have to be to each asset?
>> Oh my gosh, that's a great question. So
you have to be able to assess each
potential asset's personality type and
personality traits. I worked with a guy
overseas who was really really good at
assessing other people's personalities
and we got a we got a cable from
headquarters saying look we really
really need a recruitment in this one
unit that this foreign government had.
And so he invited the the boldness of
this was just astounding to me. I
learned a lot from him. He invited
literally everybody in the unit to go
shooting with us. So he's like, "Take
your pick." Right. And so we're shooting
and he was an incredible shot like like
Olympic level where I mean we were
drinking. You're not supposed to drink
on the range, but we're drinking and
then we're daring each other to shoot in
different ways. And we ended up putting
in must have been about 200 bucks worth
of local currency. And he shot a target
with his back turned to it. He put a
piece of bubble gum on the target. He
had his back to the target. The gun was
upside down and he shot it with his he
fired it with his pinky and he hit the
bubble gum. And I go, "No way. No way.
We put hundreds of dollars in." And and
it turned out he was he was on the
Olympic shooting team in 1984. None of
us knew that. But anyway, they went
crazy. The alcohol kind of helped ease
the whole process, too. And then after
we had been doing this about two hours,
I just kind of noticed out of the corner
of my eye that he had his arm around
this guy's shoulder and he was leading
him off to the side. Nobody else had
noticed. And I thought, man, is he good.
I'm still nervous like, who am I going
to pick? He's already making the pitch.
And then we we got back to the embassy
and he's like, done and done. I said,
you're brilliant. I don't know how you
did that.
>> So, you said he was he was good at he
was an operations officer.
>> Who was was he one of the best that you
knew at the agency? That guy.
>> Yeah, he was. And you know, the funny
thing, too, this was his first tour as
an operations officer. He had been in
the agency for 25 years, but he was a
calligrapher and he got bored. And
before he was agrapher, he was a deputy
sheriff in Baltimore.
So, it's not like, you know, he had been
doing this for for decades and it was
second nature. We were both in our first
operational tours. It's just he was it
it was just built in him as part of his
personality to be able to to talk to you
for 10 minutes and figure out if yes,
you're a legitimate target or no, I need
to move on to the next guy. I never saw
anything. I never worked with anybody
else that was such a natural at
assessing personalities like he was.
>> Would you say
would you say for the most part that
it's either you have it or you don't or
that it can be taught?
>> Oh, it can definitely be taught.
Definitely. But you also have to have
that that spark. I'll tell you another
thing. I I sat next to a guy um in um
Arabic training. So we sat next to each
other 11 and a half months, three people
in the class. So, we became really good
friends. And his dad had been the deputy
director for operations, right? And this
guy, goodlooking guy, totally ripped,
constantly working out. And man, did he
have a knack for Arabic. It was a gift.
And I remember telling my wife at the
time, he is a natural case officer.
Natural. It's going to be incredible. So
I went overseas. He went to the very
next neighboring country
and we went at the same time like on the
same day.
He calls me about 2 months into it. And
um he said, "Any chance you're going to
be in uh in my area in the future?" And
I said, "I wasn't making any plans to
be, but you okay?" He said, "No, I need
somebody to talk to." So that weekend I
flew to the next country and went to his
place and he burst into tears. I I was
shocked by it. His girlfriend was there
and he said, "This job is not for me."
He said, "I can't manipulate people like
this." He said, "I only did it cuz I
thought my dad would be happy for me to
follow in his footsteps." I said, "Man,
you're you were a natural in training."
He said, "I can't do it. I don't have it
in my heart. He ended up resigning from
the CIA and becoming a nurse and he has
been happy ever since. And that was in
like 19
my god 1994.
He hated it. So you have it or you don't
have it. If you have it, you can be
taught how to do it successfully.
Otherwise, I mean it this job really is
not for everybody. And even if you
desperately want to do it,
almost almost nobody makes it through
the training, you know, they'll they'll
push you off and say, "Oh, you should
you should be a special operations
officer," which is just kind of an
assistant, or you should be a targeting
officer, where you just sit with all
this metadata and try to locate
somebody, or you should do this, or you
should do that. But being a case
officer, man, it is hard work. It it
it's it's it's it weighs on you, you
know, manipulating people, convincing
people that not just that you're their
friend, but you're their best friend,
and then really like not even wanting to
be in the same room with them half the
time.
It's hard. Like, it's hard on you
because it it it wears you down. And I
would imagine and you have to be on all
the time.
>> All the time.
>> And I would imagine there's a balance
between like trust and skepticism with
assets. Like they have to trust you, but
you have to be skeptical of them.
>> I think that's absolutely true. I can
give you a couple of examples.
>> Um I handled an asset, an agent, uh whom
I did not recruit. He had been recruited
15, 20 years earlier. And so I inherited
him and he was probably I'm gonna say 40
years older than me. Uh, and I liked him
and he liked me and we both had like
similar taste in art and and he was
always chasing women and
I know and I know a lot about Marxism
and communism. I'm well read in Marxism
and he was a communist and so we would
debate what Markx meant about some
obscure passage, you know, stuff like
that and that was always fun for me. So,
I needed to vet him. You have to
constantly vet your your agents to make
sure that they're doing what they're
telling you they're doing. So, I said to
him, "Listen, when you come to these
meetings, you're doing a surveillance
detection route, right?" He goes, "Of
course I am. I've been doing this for 20
years. I said, "Okay, I just want to
make sure." So, I called a team of Sue,
special operations officers. We we had
them right there in the um in the
station. It was a very large station.
And so, I said, "Can you can you guys
put a team or two teams on him and just
make sure he's doing what he says he's
doing?" And they said, "Sure, because
then I can write it up and send it to
headquarters and say his vetting's good
for another year. No problems." This
guy, he lived in a northern suburb
and the SES called me a couple of times
during the surveillance detection route
and they said, "This guy is awesome.
He he took a cab
from his house
to this, you know, eight lane highway,
got off on the highway. remember he's 70
years old
and ran across the eight lanes,
leaped over the the concrete jersey
barrier, went to the other side of the
highway, and then hailed another cab
going in the opposite direction.
So, he gets to the meeting and I knew
like every minute of his route. He gets
the meeting and I said, "Did you do a
surveillance detection route on the way
to the meeting?" He said, "Yeah, it was
a good one." And uh I said, 'What'd you
do?' And he said, "Just take my word for
it. I took care of things." I said,
'Well, what's that supposed to mean?
Because I need to know if you actually
did it. And then he said, "Yeah." He
said, "I got out of the side of the
highway and I ran across the highway." I
said, "Oh my god, do you know how
provocative that is? If somebody was
actually watching you, they'd say, "What
the [__] is he doing?"
>> And he said, "Nobody was watching me." I
said, "Okay."
Everything he told me was the truth. He
never spotted the surveillance, but he I
mean there's no way you could you could
well I shouldn't I shouldn't say that.
So yeah, he he passed the test. And then
there was there was another guy too. Um
and and this is something getting to
your original point about personality
that you have to that you have to uh be
be
cognizant of.
So, I recruited this guy from scratch.
He had been a member of a bonafide
terrorist group. And when I recruited
him, he said, "I want to come totally
clean." He said, "I I'm the one who
planted the bomb at the City Bank branch
back in, you know, 19 whatever it was."
We had attributed that to the group. Um
because he had a he had a very specific
telltale crimp.
>> What's a crimp?
>> A crimp is is a certain way that you
twist the wires inside a bomb. He had a
very unique way of connecting the wires
and twisting them. So we could tell, in
fact, we had a name for him based on the
style of the crimp.
So, I knew that the guy who had blown up
the City Bank branch also planted the
bomb at the McDonald's, also planted the
bomb at the Interamerican Insurance
Company. I just didn't know his name
until he's sitting in front of me and he
says, "Yeah, I I I'm the one who built
those bombs." And I said, "Show me how
you build the bomb." So, he built one
like right in front of me in the next
meeting. He brought the supplies and uh
and I took it into the office to show
them it's it's the crimp that we've been
wondering for six years who's building
these bombs. It's him. He confessed to
me. So, the reason why he agreed to be
recruited was cuz he really really
needed the money. He had gotten his
girlfriend pregnant. They had a
daughter. He's a bum. He's broke. He's
just a terrorist. You can't make any
money from terrorism.
So um
so I started paying him and I was paying
him pretty handsomely too and he was
giving me good information like
operational information and he wasn't
this terrorist group has sort of fallen
out of fashion and he became involved
with a group of anarchists and what they
wanted to do was just blow [__] up for
no reason other than to you know shout
yay anarchy right
so he calls me one night and it was
late. It was like 11:00
and he did the uh what we call the
protocols. So like he's like I said
hello and I knew it was him cuz I had
this phone that was just for him. It was
a burner and I said hello. He says uh hi
uh the the rain in Spain falls mainly in
the plane. And so I said, "Oh,
Marzy dots and dozy dots and little
lambs eat Ivy." and he laughed and I
laughed and we hung up and that meant
meet me in the parking lot of, you know,
the the jumbo toy store at 2 am.
So, I go down there and he's like, "I'm
I'm desperate. I'm broke." He goes, "My
my daughter's sick. We have these
unexpected medical uh bills." And he has
this paper bag and it's just full of
gold jewelry.
And I said, "What's this?" He said,
"It's all my wife's jewelry." He said,
"Can you buy it from me?" And I go,
"Dude, I'm not a jeweler. I I don't know
what I I I have no idea what this stuff
is worth." He said, "I'm desperate." I
said, "All right, let's meet tomorrow at
midnight behind the church in this
northern suburb."
And so I go into work the next day and I
said, "You know, the the grasshopper
called me in the middle of the night and
tried to sell me his wife's jewelry." He
goes, the station chief says, "Well, how
much does he want?" I said, "He needs
five grand." He goes, "He's been good.
Just give him the five grand. We'll call
it a We'll call it an early Christmas
bonus." So I met him behind the church.
I gave him five grand. He's like, "Oh my
god, thank you so much. Thank you. Thank
you. He signs the receipt and he was
forever indebted to me. He actually
cried when I when I left to return to
headquarters. He's like, "I'm not sure I
can work with anybody else." I said,
"Oh, you're going to be fine. Everybody
else has money that's just as green as
the money that I carry. You're going to
be fine."
What's up, guys? What you're about to
see here is an intense video of Gordon
Ramsay in the kitchen making absolute
magic. Brace yourselves.
Okay, what you're actually seeing here
is my pre-in routine. The same thing
every morning. Three organic eggs, low
sugar oatmeal, and F FRCC medium roast
coffee. But in my day-to-day life, a
12-in pan is pretty much the one thing
that I couldn't live without in the
kitchen because I either cook or I'd
heat up five meals a day on it. So, this
is the one I use. It's from Hexclad. I
use it because it has both the
performance of a stainless steel pan and
the convenience of a non-stick pan and I
don't have to choose between the two
like I normally would. So, if it passes
the eggs test without sticking, then
we're good to go. They're also
toxin-free, dishwasher and oven safe,
and they come with a lifetime warranty.
It's also just really cool looking. I
don't know if this video will do it
justice or not. So, here it is. You can
now ditch your crusty old pan for a sexy
new Hexclad pan at a discounted rate
because for a limited time, our
listeners are getting 10% off with our
exclusive link. So, just head to
hexcloud.com/dalton
or scan the QR code embedded in this
video. That's hex c a d
o n. And make sure to support the show
and let them know that we sent you. Back
to the show. Was that a was that when
you were in Greece?
>> That was a 17 November guy.
>> Mhm.
>> He was actually a member of 17 November.
>> We were never able to conclusively
identify um uh any members of 17
November but three.
>> Yeah. So he was one of the many many
many peripheral figures that you know
had kind of brushed up against 17
November but never were asked to join
the group. Well, still, man, even if
you're not a card carrying member, he
clearly did quite a bit. He's a bad guy.
>> Yeah. I've never heard you talk about
that one, but um No.
>> Okay. So, you mentioned you mentioned a
couple things that I want to come back
to. The first one, the the guy that ran
the outrageous SDR, that was your
favorite agent, right?
>> Yeah. He was just the sweetest guy. And
you know, when I left the agency,
um I was going back to Greece. I don't
even remember why. I It must have been
vacation or something.
and you're not supposed to do this
because once once you leave, you leave.
You're out. And I thought, "Nah, I just
want to say hello and see how he's
doing." And his son answered the phone.
And so I asked him for his dad. I said,
"I'm a I'm a distant relative from from
America." And he said, "Oh, my my dad
died." And I said, "Oh, you're kidding."
And he said, "Yeah, he died two years
ago." I said, "Damn it. He smoked like a
chimney." He did one right off the
other. It was ridiculous. He said,
"Yeah, yeah, lung cancer got him." Oh,
there there's a hilarious story in the
last interview. If if people want to
check that one out, I recommend they do
and it's timestamped in I believe part
one of that interview, John's favorite
agent, and it's [__] hilarious. But,
um, the reason I wanted to bring it up
is because you talked about him running
an SDR and like running across the
highway. But, so, do you have to maybe
explain to people what an SDR is?
>> Oh, yeah. You're not supposed to.
>> You have to have a plausible reason to
go from A to B. Correct.
>> Exactly. That's the key of an SDR.
SDRs are very, very specific. SDR
standing for surveillance detection
route. They're very specific. So, there
are a couple of terms that you need to
know. Like a red road is a big major
road that has lots of cars. So, if
you're on a red road, you can't possibly
tell if you're under surveillance. But
you and I and everybody else, we drive
on red roads every day, right? Then
there's a black road which is not well
traveled maybe through a neighborhood or
whatever. So
you start at what's called a kickoff
point. It could be your house. It could
be your office. It could be whatever
wherever you happen to be every day. And
you have to make it look like you're
running errands. Ersands that are
totally normal and legit. So, you get in
your car, you get on a red road, and you
drive to the dry cleaners, and you
either pick up or drop off your dry
cleaning. Okay, that's totally normal.
Everybody does that. Then you go from
that first what's called an SDR stop to
the second SDR stop. Now, the second SDR
stop, you're not going to get back on
that red road because you're from the
area. You're familiar with the area. So,
you're going to do a cut through. You're
going to cut through a residential
neighborhood on a black road, and you
see if you drag anybody in with you from
the red road, and then you go to, let's
say, a wine shop because there's this
certain bottle of wine that you're
looking for.
And then you make a note to yourself.
Try not to write it down, but the make,
model, and color of the car, the license
plate, just to see if you see them
later. The definition of surveillance is
multiple sightings at time and distance.
So, you see the car multiple times at
different places. Um, multiple sightings
at time and distance, different times
and different places. Right?
So, you stop at the wine store, you buy
the bottle of wine,
and then you
make what's called a provocative move.
This is what's called, they call it the
provocative phase where you stair step.
You you go a block, make a right, go
another block, make a left, make a
right, make a left, make a right, like
you're going up a set of stairs, right?
So,
normal people don't drive like that.
It's very provocative. If you're under
surveillance, you're going to notice it
then.
And then you stop at, you know, the
Jo-Ann's Fabrics and you buy, you know,
set of buttons or whatever. I don't
know.
And then you to go from stop three to
the meeting location, you do some
driving maneuvers that nobody would do.
You drive halfway down a block, you pull
in somebody's driveway, you pull out,
you make a U-turn, then you pull into
another driveway and make another
U-turn, and you just do all kinds of
crazy [__] that
just in case the surveillance are so
good that you've missed them,
that is going to be where you finally
get them. And then if you have
surveillance, you abort the meeting and
you just drive home and you do the whole
thing again 24 hours later.
That's what surveillance detection is.
>> So it's just it's just if you see it
just more than once if you see the same
car.
>> Mhm.
>> That's the principle. It's more than
once.
>> Yes.
>> So what were like and you became a
surveillance detection instructor at one
point in your career, right?
>> I did.
>> Okay. So if you were either um if you
guys were tailing a trainee or um even
like let's say like a real a real life
opposition force that was tailing you,
right? What were some of the What are
some of the things that they would do um
to stay on your tail? Like switch
plates, disguises, what would they do?
>> Oh, yes and yes. They switch plates,
they switch clothes, um they put on
disguises, they'll put on a mustache,
they'll put on a wig or a different hat
or um some will jump out of the car and
start going on foot. And then maybe you
get out of your car and you go on foot
or you go on a bus or you go on the
subway or in high threat areas, we'll go
into a parking garage and switch cars to
a rental car that's been prepositioned
there by another officer. So it gets
very sophisticated. And then in places
like China, Russia, Cuba,
um
you don't do a two or three hour SDR,
you do an eight hour SDR. Yeah, because
then they're using, you know, infrared
cameras looking for body heat and
they're using helicopters and cuz
they're going to catch the guy that
you're trying to meet and they're going
to execute him. So, you have to really
make sure that you're not being
followed.
Another example is once you leave the
red road,
um I I worked with a guy who got a
little bit lazy. He was a good officer,
but he but he got lazy. So, he starts
off at the embassy, which is in the
center of town, and he takes a red road
far north, and he goes to um to a
restaurant. There was like a TGI Friday
up there or something. Disgusting place.
And he stops and has a sandwich. Okay,
that's a legit stop. I wouldn't use it,
but it it's a legit stop. And then he
drives all the way back downtown again.
Okay, you're caught. You're caught. Cuz
nobody would drive an hour to go to a
TGI Friday in Hburg. Nobody. Right. And
then even if you even if you were under
surveillance and knew it, you wouldn't
be able to spot their surveillance going
back into the center of town because
it's another red road. It never made
sense to me. And sure enough,
headquarters dinged him. You have to
write a whenever you meet with a source,
you have to write three separate cables
at least. You have to write a cable that
has the intelligence that he gave you
that you need to have disseminated to
the analysts. You need to write an
accompanying operational cable with all
of the stuff that the analysts don't
have a need to know, but that your desk
officer needs to know. Like, ah, he
asked me for more money. Oh, he's
depressed because his wife left him. Oh,
he just got promoted. Whatever. the
analyst doesn't have a need to know for
any of that stuff. So th those two
cables and then you have to write a very
detailed cable on your surveillance
detection route and that goes to counter
intelligence
and then CI will look at it and say oh
this this is this is bad. He went all
the way up to TGI Friday and then came
all the way back down again and sure
enough they dinged him and they said
don't do that again. if you were being
followed, you just blew everything.
>> This question is like kind of an aside,
but you mentioned uh before trying to
vet what an asset says to make sure that
they they are doing exactly as they say
and of course that the information that
they're giving you is true, if that's
the case. But is there operations
officers that lie about the intelligence
that they get to build a career for
themselves? Oh my god, we spent so much
time on that in in training. The the
answer is yes. Unfortunately,
um that leads to a very quick firing.
Um there are two things that case
officers
there are three things that case
officers sometimes
are caught doing. Sometimes you will
work for a total [__]
who says everybody needs to get five
pieces of finished intelligence or you
don't meet um threshold.
Okay. Well, some months I'm going to get
like 10 or 12. And some months I'm
cultivating new agents and I'm not going
to get any. And they're not saying you
need to average five a month. You need
five a month.
So, what that does is it encourages
people to just make the [__] up and
write it up as intelligence. Maybe
they'll pull it out of some obscure
newspaper,
which happens. Or
you have a meeting with an agent, he
gives you a a a an amazing plethora of
intelligence reports, and you just keep
five in reserve for next month. If it's
not too terribly time-sensitive, you
give them the five that they need right
now, you save the next five for next
month. That's intellectually dishonest.
And another one that people get caught
doing, and this is something I never
ever understood.
Depending on the station chief, you're
allowed to spend like up to five bucks
at a at a cover stop, an SDR cover stop,
all the way up to 20 bucks at each cover
stop. It just depends on who happens to
be the chief.
Well, sometimes people will make up
receipts or they'll save receipts and
then just put the money in their
pockets. So, what would possess you to
try to steal $20 from the CIA? Is that
really Is it worth being fired to steal
$20 from the CIA? I just never
understood it.
>> Well, does that say something about the
personality type? that's recruited for
case officers.
>> Yes.
Yeah, that's exactly what it is.
You know, we got
I I was in one assignment and and there
was some big like senior senior enemy
leader coming.
We heard he was staying in this hotel.
It was like a boutique hotel. and had a
bar in the in the lobby and he was
bringing this giant contingent of
intelligence officers with him to
protect him. So
our boss said,
you know, if if you want to try to get
in on this, you should go to the bar
because we heard that these guys are
hanging out at the bar.
I'm like, I really don't want to go.
It's not my area of expertise. I don't
speak the language. I don't really care
about this country.
And um and my wife, who was also a CIA
officer, said, "Nah, you really should
go. You know how they are. If you don't
go, they're going to criticize you." So,
I go. The bar was smaller than I
expected it to be. But literally every
seat was taken by a CIA officer.
I was just like, "You guys." I turned
around and walked out. And then the next
day they were all bitching because the
station chief after the fact had found
some obscure
rule that unless you are conducting an
operational meeting,
they won't pay for alcohol.
So people are ordering these $20, you
know,
espresso martinis,
multiple espresso martinis, and
everybody's out of pocket $100 because
that wasn't an operational meeting.
You're just hoping that somebody from
that delegation happens to walk in to
the bar and sit and order a drink and
then you, you know, you all beat each
other up to see who can strike up a
conversation with a guy. Oh man, I was
so glad I didn't stay.
bunch of bums.
>> To be fair, they did tell you to go to
the bar.
>> They did. It was bad leadership is what
it was.
>> And something else you mentioned uh when
you were talking about you used the
example of like running an SDR in China,
like an 8 hour SDR with infrared
cameras. And
>> it just got me thinking like you me you
mentioned this very briefly. We kind of
ran out of time in our last interview
where you said something along the lines
of like, you know, gone are the days of
just being able to cross borders and
alias and do a brush pass because
>> oh my god with with facial recognition
software and AI. I actually posed this
question to a current CIA officer. I
said, "How do you guys cross borders?
How do you get through airports like in
different in different uh names?" And he
said, "We don't know yet."
still struggling. Yeah, the technology
is developing so quickly, they just
can't keep up with it.
>> So, man, that that a lot of things are
run through my head right now, but uh
something I just thought of, I heard
from one of the science of technology
people that gave an interview that the
agency is involved in or dabbling in VR
and AR type stuff.
>> Oh, yeah. She didn't want to. She didn't
say what, but what would you like what
would you imagine that that's about?
>> Oh man. Um, I don't know because I've
been out a long time, but I will tell
you that the DS&T, the sorry, the the
Directorate of Science and Technology,
which is one of the four directorates at
the CIA
when I was there was almost an
afterthought because mostly what it was
responsible for was disguises
and um, you know, briefcases with secret
pockets in them and you know, supporting
operations. Now they are so
sophisticated and so far advanced
working with the likes of Palunteer
and Elon Musk's different companies and
AWS and all these like cutting edge you
know Nvidia all these cutting edge tech
companies they are so far advanced that
instead of doing the silly concealment
devices and disguises is they just pawn
that off to you know to you know
individuals or or makeup companies and
and and they do the big ticket items.
Now I would say what the DS&T is doing
with things like virtual reality are
closer now to what DARPA is doing on
futuristic tech than what they ever did
in the past at the CIA.
So, what would you say as an example?
Like, what would a big ticket item be in
that case?
Man, I you know what? I I couldn't even
venture to say it. I I don't even know.
It's become so sophisticated. I sat next
to a guy for years, awesome guy,
terrific analyst, and he always had a
thing for tech. We used to joke about it
cuz we were all young. We were all in
our 20s. were all techsavvy. Now he's
the CIA's chief technical officer, SIS4.
He could be the director if the
president wanted him to be. And I
remember saying to a buddy of mine when
when our friend was promoted, I was
like, man, he really made it like to the
very top. And my friend said it was it
was the tech, you know, he I'll I'll
tell you what he did just as a favor on
his day off. Um, he made a computer
program
to allow our
Middle East analysts
to make family trees of the royal
families in the countries that they
cover, right? No such software existed.
There was no such thing as, you know,
familytree maker or genealogy.com. There
was no such thing as.com. I We're
talking about pre- internet days. and he
took three days off on his own time and
made this program, this software that
everybody in the office used. And I was
like, "Wow, he really knows a lot about
tech, huh?" And then two or three years
later, they invented the internet or
they didn't invent it then, but they
they released the internet to the
general public and he just jumped right
in and really really made something out
of himself. So, he's in charge of all
this stuff now. Yeah.
>> Did you ever have an experience with
DARPA?
>> Never. I was never cleared to even know
what it was they were doing over there.
They're so far advanced,
>> right? And that's what they say. They
say uh they say DARPA's
20 years ahead of what we can see.
>> Mhm.
>> And so I would think that
is the agency.
>> Yeah.
One of the things I learned early on at
the agency though is that it is far
cheaper and far easier to just buy
something that's already been invented
than it is to develop it from scratch.
That was before 9/11. Post 911, money is
not an issue at all. And so DARPA is
doing it. NSA's doing it. CIA's doing
it. And then they're with within QEL,
they're financing it uh in the public
sector. I'm sorry, in the private
sector.
So, the sky's is the limit, man. It
really is. And I can't even imagine the
Russians spending that kind of money on
tech. Maybe the Chinese do. I don't
know. They've got the money. But since
911, we've gone we've gone whole hog in
tech development.
>> Chinese could always just steal it from
us, I guess.
>> They steal it from us. Yeah, just like
the Israelis do.
>> We'll talk about that. We'll talk about
Oh, we'll talk about the MSAD, don't
worry. Um,
>> Incitel is the the it's openly the CIA's
venture capital firm, right?
>> Correct.
>> Yeah.
in their I want to say invest they
invested in Palunteer or
>> they gave Palunteer their first it was
like a million and a half to get off the
ground very first investment and now
look at Palanteer just this year for the
first time they have more than a billion
dollars in revenue so it's it's a
success story
>> so Palunteer does commercial stuff now
too it's not just um DoD and government
contracts
>> it's a standalone profitable tech
anybody,
>> right? So, they're selling to civilians,
so to speak. But, um, I remember when I
remember hearing when Palanteer first
came out that people at the agency
didn't like it at all
>> and maybe they gave him a trial run or
something and they were like, "Fuck
this. We don't want to use this." Do
they use it now, you think?
>> Yeah.
>> What is it? What would they use it for?
>> Oh, all kinds of stuff. Mostly mo Well,
you know what? I probably shouldn't say.
I probably shouldn't say.
>> Would it be along the lines of
targeting?
>> Yes.
>> Yes. You know, this this metadata has to
come from somewhere, right? So, like
with Aviseda, and remember, Aviseda was
years ago
where we're just laying out papers on
the ground and trying to connect the
dots. It's way more sophisticated now.
You can't get away now. You just can't
get away. So
rather than have analysts pouring over
this stuff and you just hoping that your
analysts are really, really smart,
AI does it all. They do all of it.
And it makes it much easier. That's why,
you know, that's why in the Obama
administration, John Brennan had the
Tuesday morning kill list meetings.
because the tech got sophisticated
enough that you could just write up a
list of people that you want to kill
that week and you dish out the
assignments. The teams go out, they kill
everybody that's on the list and then
they meet next Tuesday and get that kill
list and you just do it week after week.
Well, if you're not having to devote
armies of targeting analysts uh to to
finding these guys, if if your computers
can find them just based on their, you
know, email messaging, text messaging,
whatever, metadata
there, your job's easy. You just fire a
missile from the drone, or you drop a
guy in that does a close-in shot, and
then you get back on the helicopter and
fly home.
I hate to sound cynical like that, but
that's just the way it is.
>> I think that's uh just calling it how it
is.
What uh what year or years was that was
Brandon doing that Tuesday morning kill
list?
>> He started in '09 and kept it going. I
have no idea if Donald Trump kept it or
Joe Biden kept it or revived it, but it
was something that they were very proud
of in the Obama administration. They
were just going out whacking everybody.
>> Yeah. Well, nobody nobody dropped more
missiles from drones than Obama did.
>> No, nobody. Nobody. And you know,
somebody said I I naively said, you
know, the oversight committees need to
be on this. And then a friend of mine
said
to say what in their re-election
campaigns. We need to kill fewer
terrorists.
If I'm reelected, we'll
be a good one.
>> America in the 21st century.
>> And you and uh you and John Brennan are
not the biggest fans of each other,
right?
>> No, sir. Why not?
>> John and I have always hated each other.
I never liked him. I never trusted him.
I believe that he is the archetypal
sociopath.
Somebody just by dent of his sociopathy
has been able to rise to the top.
Yeah.
And we go back to 1990. I mean, I've
known John for what, what is that now?
35 years. Never liked him, never trusted
him, never respected him, but he had a
rabbi in George Tennant. And uh and the
next thing you know, he's at the top of
the heap. It was John Brennan who
literally put me in prison.
John had a
John had a Nixonian obsession with
national security leaks except when he
was the one doing the leaking
and now it's come back to bite him in
the ass. Uh and we can get into that if
you want but but
after I blew the whistle on the torture
program um and John became the deputy
national security adviser for
counterterrorism in Obama's first term.
He went on to be CIA director in the
second term. John asked the Justice
Department to secretly reopen the case
against me. The Bush administration said
I had not committed a crime. They closed
the case. I had no idea that my phones
were tapped. My emails were intercepted.
FBI guys following me everywhere. And
then John wrote a memo to Eric Holder,
who was the attorney general at the
time, and he said, "Charge him with
espionage."
And Holder wrote back and said, "My
people don't think he committed
espionage."
And then Brennan wrote back and said,
"Charge him anyway and make him defend
himself." So they arrested me, charged
me with five felonies, three counts of
espionage, waited until I went bankrupt,
and then dropped the espionage charges.
So I ended up taking a plea to a a
lesser charge. I did 23 months in
prison. And um and it was because I had
revealed the CIA's dirty laundry and
this illegal, immoral torture program.
And now it's John's turn to be on the
hot seat. John and all his cronies like
Jim Clapper and Jim Comey and Hillary
Clinton
and all these other ones who thought
they were untouchable.
Now they're going to have to answer for
their actions.
So before we come back to that, uh I
think it was in 2005,
Brennan was appointed CEO of a company
called the analysis corporation.
>> Mhm.
>> Wasn't this the company that was stood
up for senior intelligence service
officers to use as like a tax pass
through before they went to [__]
>> It was one of two. Um the analysis
company was one it was based in uh in
Arlington Virginia and the other was
called um Araus Corporation. It's funny
because the analysis company was where
all the SIS senior intelligence service
level analysts would go, the retired
analysts and Arais was where the retired
ops guys would go and they were
legitimately set up just as LLC
passroughs, right? So people could go
and smoke cigars and drink coffee and
tell stories with their friends and hang
out all day and then lo and behold they
started making money after 9/11. Arais
was bought by I think it was IBM for
well over a billion dollars. All these
guys got not just rich but they got like
you know megaillions lotto kind of rich
and then
and then the the analysis company. It's
funny you know everybody
It seems like everybody who's left the
director of intelligence has tried to do
private intelligence either as a
singleton or working for one of these
these companies and it never succeeds,
right? Because pretty much anybody can
do analysis if you're an expert enough
in in a in a topic. So why would you pay
millions of dollars for these CIA
cronies to to write you a paper when you
can just hire some professor and give
him five grand and he can do it for you.
He's as much an expert as they are cuz
they don't have access to classified
information anymore. And even if they
did, they couldn't give it to you.
So it didn't work. He was also on the
board of was like BAE Systems and there
were a couple of Beltway Bandits and
Defense Contractors,
you know, 60,000 here, 100,000 there and
you put together a pretty good living.
>> Mhm.
>> So, can you explain to people what
private intelligence is?
>> Oh, sure. I actually did it for for
several years. Um,
private intelligence really is is what
it sounds like. You're doing exactly
what you did at the CIA, whether it's
analysis or operations. You're just not
using classified information to do it.
And I'll give you an example. Um, I got
a call from a criate billionaire one
time and he said that
he had one daughter, just one daughter,
who was going to inherit all of his
wealth and she was engaged to this bum,
this Greek criate guy who lived in
London.
And he said, "I don't like this guy. I
don't want this guy anywhere near my
money or my daughter, and I need for you
to find out as much about him as you
possibly can. And I said, "Okay, so uh
what's my budget?" And he gave me a
number. I flew to Cyprus. I I bribed a
police captain,
uh to to give me all the secret police
files.
I flew to London. I did surveillance on
this guy's building.
And finally, it took me about six weeks
of of working full-time. And I I got
back to the billionaire and I said,
"Yeah, he's a bum and he's cheating on
her." So I said, "First of all, he's
been stealing money from her." And he
used the money to buy some warehouse in
London. And I had satellite pictures of
it from Google Earth or Google. Yeah.
Earth. And uh I said he's gone in with
with some partners. There's like an
Armenian guy and a Turkish guy. And they
all went in. They're losing money, but
they used your money, I said, to buy the
place. He told your daughter it was for
something else. And then he just took
the money and bought this warehouse. So
that money's gone. He's trying to buy a
mansion in London because he thinks as
soon as he gets married, he's going to
live happily ever after. It's all about
the money. And I said, "And besides
that, he has multiple drug arrests."
He's like, "What?" And I said, "Yeah, it
was smuggling." He was smuggling drugs
from Israel into Cyprus. He got caught,
got arrested, paid off some judge, so he
was never prosecuted. Um, the Brits
think that he's smuggling drugs there.
So the old man went to his daughter and
he he told her, "You're being scammed."
So that's operationally private
intelligence.
Private analysis is different. It's
actually a lot more fun. So I went into
business for myself
in the years between when I left the
Loiton or the year and a half between
when I left the LO initution, I went to
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
and then I picked it up again when I
left the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee. So, one of my big I I had
three big clients. I had the ninth
largest mutual um sorry, the ninth
largest um hedge fund in the world. I
had a mutual fund and I had the largest
mining company in the world. And then I
did I did a contract for an oil company
as well. So, they would ask very very
specific questions. Who's going to win
the Romanian municipal elections in
September? I'm like,
I don't know anything about Romania. So,
where do you go? You go to LinkedIn,
right? I'm Orthodox
and everybody in Romania is Orthodox.
So, I send connection requests to every
everybody who looks interesting who
happens to be Orthodox in Romania. It's
like 60 people. and I say, "Hey, I got
this question. You know, one guy gave me
private polling data." So, I said to the
client, and I said, "It would help me in
the in the analysis. It would help me if
I knew why you cared who is going to win
the municipal election." And they said,
"Sure.
We're thinking of buying a silver mine.
And the silver mine is underneath a
village. And to mine the silver, we have
to destroy the whole village.
So if the socialists win, they're not
going to let us do it.
>> And if the conservatives win, they'll
just relocate everybody and we'll just
destroy the thing and take the silver.
And I said, "Well, the polls say the
conservatives are going to win." And so
they bought the mine at the pre-election
price. The conservatives win. They move
everybody out of the village. The
company destroys the village and takes
out billions of dollars worth of silver.
Another one was this one was kind of
funny.
Ayay, this company, they buy an oil
field
um or they they didn't buy it, they
lease an oil field, but they lease it
for like 99 years in Oman, and it's
right on the border with Yemen.
And none of them had any idea at the
time that al-Qaeda controls the border
of Oman and Yemen and you're not going
to be able to get anywhere near that
oil, not within 50 miles of it. So they
they wanted to know
um if the Omanis if they approached the
Omanis and offered to pay for the Omani
military to force al-Qaeda out, would
the Omanis do it or should they just
walk away from this oil lease? So, I
went to Oman. I talked to the minister
of oil and the deputy minister of oil. I
talked to the deputy uh intelligence
service director and I I kind of knew
all these guys like we had met. We
weren't like buddies or anything, but we
had met. So, when I asked for the
appointment through the Omani embassy,
they said yes, yes, come and come and
you know, we'll have a conversation. So,
I went back to the company and I said I
said, "They're going to gouge you, but
they'll push al-Qaeda out of your oil
field." And so, they were able to drill
for the oil. That's what private
intelligence is.
>> So, when you tell stories in that
context, it just it it makes it seem
like you're not makes it seem you're
like a high-speed private investigator.
>> That's really what it comes down to.
Yes.
>> Are you familiar with Black Cube?
>> No. Nope. don't know that one.
>> They're uh
they're a private intelligence firm that
is staffed by uh they're an Israeli
private intelligence firm that is all
exad guys. Um
>> and they allegedly
>> uh I think David Boy is the head
attorney on the Epstein.
>> Oh, sure.
>> Allegedly David Boy used it on someone.
See, and the Israelis have no
compunction at all about violating any
law that gets in their way. And then
they say, "What are you going to do
about it?"
>> Yeah. Uh, we'll get there in a second
because I want to I want to ask you, so
you mentioned um private intelligence.
You're not using classified information
to do it is what you said,
>> right?
>> Um, but what about what about when the
agency
works with private intelligence firms?
because I I read um Leon Petta's book
who was CIA director in the Obama
administration as well as Secretary of
Defense,
>> but he he mentioned um he starts talking
about he's like one of the first things
I did was shut down this program that
was I forget how he described it either
controversial or unnecessary or
something like that, but he gave no
detail and I was like what the hell is
he talking about?
>> So I look it up and it was the it was a
Blackwater assassination program to go
after targets globally. And long story
short, he ended up outing Eric Prince to
uh the House Intelligence Committee by
name. Eric Prince was operating I guess
as a knock or had a 2011 file.
>> That's why Eric Prince lives in Dubai
now and not in the United States.
>> So I guess my my question to you then is
like I had no idea and also Blackwater
was involved in stealing secrets.
>> Like they had a network of spies. When
you think about Blackwater, you think
about boots on the ground, military
contracts. people know that they ran the
GRS program for CIA, but like what how
how did how would a CIA how would the
CIA work with a contractor like that?
The first thing you do is the contractor
appoints all former CIA people to its
board of directors and then you make the
former head of the counterterrorism
center, Kofheer Black, your vice
president. And then you hire all of
Kofheer's buddies to be the head of your
different divisions. So,
is it CIA? Not really. It's quasi CIA.
Everybody's from the CIA. Everybody's
getting rich, right? Because remember,
post 911, money was literally not an
issue. I I told you in our last
conversation that uh I don't know, four,
five, six days after 9/11, I went up to
Kofheer Black again, the head of the
CIA's counterterrorism center, and I
said, "Keofheer, I have an idea for an
operation I wanted to pass by you." and
he put up his hands and he says,
"Whatever it is, just do it. I have so
much money I can't possibly spend it
all." And so I did it. So, you know,
when when Eric Prince goes to the CIA
and says, "Yeah, I'll do all these
things for you. We've got assassination
squads. We've got interceptors. We've
got boots on the ground. We'll do
anything you want. I want a billion a
half dollars." And then the CIA wires it
the next day. Then you can do whatever
you want. But the thing is is how do you
control people who don't actually work
for you? You can't. And you risk them
going rogue, which of course they do
because it's their nature. If you're
being if you're being contracted to run
an assassination program,
you're going to go out there and
assassinate people. Well, everybody's
human and you make mistakes and you
convince yourself that, you know, Ahmed
Schmmed is a really bad guy. And
actually, nah, it's a cousin with a
similar name, but you just put a bullet
in this guy's head. Okay, you write a
check for 100 grand to his widow and
just move on. And that's not cool. It's
a It's a crime. You can't just go around
murdering people because you think they
might be a bad guy. And so, Panetta, I
never really liked Petta just cuz he's
not a nice guy, but um but Panetta was
right to shut that down.
Okay. So, um,
what are the what are the legalities
then of a
Blackwater team going out to hit
somebody as if a ground branch team
would? It's is it like I think Title 10,
Title 50,
>> right?
>> One's military, one's CIA. I can't
remember which was which.
>> Actually, the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals just ruled on this, I'm going to
say 3 weeks ago, four weeks ago. Um
because that's that's a legitimate legal
question that you're asking. What it
what are the legalities? It's never been
tried before, right? Like the CIA has
permission through the amended version
of Executive Order 1233
to kill anybody in the world who poses a
clear and present danger to the United
States. Okay?
And the CIA is going to decide who's the
clear and present danger. And they're
not going to tell you because you're not
cleared, right? I'm not cleared.
We're just gonna have to take their word
for it. But they have the legal
authority to kill people through 1233.
Then they hire these contractors like,
well, we have GRS, we have we have
ground branch and marine branch and air
branch, and we have all these these
teams that are out there killing,
kidnapping, blowing up, you know,
whatever.
but they're not agency personnel.
They just work for these private
companies like Blackwater.
So, is that legal?
And the the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals said yes, it's legal. So long as
they have a written contract, they are
acting on behalf of the CIA and the CIA
has presidential authority to carry out
these operations.
Mhm.
That was just decided. And actually, I
got a call from one of the attorneys in
the case and he said, "I have no idea
why nobody in the media gives a [__]
about this decision." And so I I told
him I would write something, but there's
nothing out there. Nobody paid any
attention to this decision.
And it it the reason I paid attention
was because um it was Abu Zuba who was
the plaintiff in the case. Abu Zubeda
said, "These guys tortured me and I want
to sue them.
And the court was like, "Yeah, sorry.
You got tortured, but they were acting
on behalf of the CIA." And the CIA was
legally permitted to torture people, so
you're [__] out of luck.
Oh, wow. Uh, okay. There's a lot of
places to go there. Uh, first of you,
you you you mentioned that you went to
Kofheer with an idea for an operation.
Can you say what that was?
>> It was dumb. um
our our orders after 9/11. I mean, in in
the days after 9/11, literally everybody
was working on al-Qaeda. Everybody in
the counterterrorism center, I'm talking
thousands and thousands of people. And
then once we got our bearings, I'm going
to say
a couple of weeks after 9/11, we got our
bearings and
authorities were divided up. I went back
to my home base which was you know 17
November. And so our standing orders
from the White House were to destroy
every terrorist group in the world that
meant Americans harm. And so we started
going back through, you know, 35 year
old files looking for leads. And I found
a couple in the unlikeliest places like
Switzerland
and Milan.
You know, terrorists get old and retire,
too. As crazy as it sounds. I told you
the story about Bruno, the Sasha Baron
Cohen film. People get old and they're
like, I'm tired of this terrorism stuff.
I'm just going to retire.
>> You didn't tell the story about Bruno.
You told the story. What what I thought
of is when you went to that old man who
had who was working in a bank at the
time. He was the one that witnessed the
murder. But you didn't tell the story
about uh Bruno.
>> I didn't.
>> I don't think so.
>> I got a call from Sasha Baron Cohen one
night
>> and he says, "Hey, I don't know if you
know my characters, but I said, oh
yeah." I said, "Listen, Borat." I said,
"I almost pissed myself in. It's still
the funniest movie I've ever seen in my
life." So he said, "Well, I've got this
character Bruno." I said, "Yeah, yeah,
the the gay Austrian fashion
correspondent." He said, "Yeah." So, he
made me sign a non-disclosure agreement
and um he said literally nobody's in on
the gag except
um Pam Anderson. Literally no one else
in the film was in on the gag. Well,
except
uh
that was in Borat except Borat's
assistant. So anyway, um he said, "We
can't let anybody know that it's me and
that I'm in character." And I said,
"Okay, so what can I do for you?" And he
said, "We're going to go to the Middle
East.
I want to get in front of bonafide
terrorists." He said, "I'm thinking
Hezbollah
or Al-Qaeda, and I want to show them
Polaroids of men having anal sex, like
hardcore anal sex,
and I want to ask them if this is a form
of torture, and should these men be sent
to Guantanamo?"
>> Oh my god.
So, I said, I go, "Oh,
that's a that's a bad idea."
Yeah. And I said, 'You know, just as a
general rule, you really shouldn't mess
with the religious types. I go, they'll
kill you. They'll kill your crew.
They'll go out onto the street and kill
people who remind them of you.
And he said, "Well, I've got to make it
totally believable."
So,
so we met a couple of days later, and I
said, "I have an idea.
Well, before that, he said he wanted to
he wanted to film it in Syria. And I go,
"Yeah, that's that's not a good idea
either." And um I said, "I know I know
the Libyan ambassador in Washington, and
the Libyans are trying really hard."
This is a year before Gaddafi was
killed. I said, "The Libyans are trying
really hard to sort of, you know,
integrate and get with the program with
the West." and they're always asking if
we know of any films that might want to
film in in Libya. He said, "Can't do
it." He said, "As a Jew," he said, "I
just I would fear for my safety in
Libya. I can't do it."
And I said, "Well,"
I said, "Syria really we shouldn't mess
with, and Lebanon you can't do." I said,
"We could do Morocco. That's easy. There
are all kinds of films in Morocco or
even Algeria." And he's like, "No, I I
kind of have my heart set on on Syria."
And I said, 'Well, I know the Syrian
ambassador, so let me just raise it kind
of off the record and see what his
reaction is. He goes, "No, no. There's a
Syrian consulate in Newport Beach, and
I'm going to go down there next week." I
I go, "No, no. Let me do what you're
paying me to do, and I'll take care of
it."
Couple nights later, I'm laying in bed.
I'm reading a book. It's late, like
11:30, and the phone rings and I look, I
said to my wife, "It's Sasha Baron Cohen
at 11:30 at night." So I said, "Sasha,
how are you?" And he says with that
thick British accent he has, he goes, "I
think I [__] up, mate."
And I said, "Oh, don't tell me you went
to that Syrian consulate." He goes,
"Yeah, he went to the Syrian consulate."
He goes in the the first door. He goes,
the consular officer sees him, comes out
from behind the bulletproof glass and
says, "I know who you are. I know what
you do, and you are not welcome in
Syria." I said, "Damn it." Okay. I said,
"We have to figure something else out."
So then I went to meet with him. So I
said, when I got there, I have an idea.
I said, 'I think strongly that we should
stay away from the religious types, but
there are bonafide terrorists,
almost all of whom are in Damascus, who
have retired, Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, PFLP, General
Command, Democratic Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, Abu Nidal
organization. I said, "These guys were
bad guys." Like hijacking airplanes and
blowing up airplanes and shooting up
airports and working with Carlos the
Jackal. I mean, these were bad guys.
And he said, "Well, how do you get a get
a hold of them?" And I said,
"I'm going to guess that they're listed
in the Damascus Telephone Book."
So, I went to the Library of Congress.
Of course, the Damascus telephone book
is in Arabic. I go to the Library of
Congress. They have a copy of the
Damascus telephone book. And I find four
of these guys. They're all like in their
70s and they don't do anything anymore.
They just they're just retired. They
drink coffee and smoke cigarettes and
pass the day. So I called them
and I said, "We're doing a documentary
about the Middle East peace process and
about the role of, you know, freedom
fighters and activists." And I made all
this [__] up and they said, "Yeah, that
they would be interested in appearing in
a documentary like that." So I called
Sasha and I said, "Bingo, we got four of
them." And he said, "Okay, well now we
have to find a place to film." He said,
"How about Aman?" I said, "Aman's a
great idea, but I said, 'The Jordanian
intelligence service is one of the best
in the world, and they're going to be on
you like white on rice, so we have to
bring the Jordanians in on the gag." He
said, "Absolutely not. The Jordanians
can't know that it's him and that it's a
comedy. They have to believe that this
is a legitimate documentary being done
by an Austrian journalist." I said,
"Man, this is a bad idea." I said,
"Sasha, look at it this way.
If the Jordanian intelligence service
sees four bonafide terrorists
all flying to Aman on the same day to go
to your hotel room, you're done." And he
said, "I'm going to have to risk it.
Nobody can be in on the gag."
So he and a cameraman flew to Aman the
day before I did and
he told me the next day when I arrived
they land and they get off the plane and
they're walking out like to get a cab
and there's a guy standing there with a
sign and it says Sasha Baron Cohen and
and so he says I'm Sasha Baron Cohen and
the guy says oh the car is waiting for
you. So he goes out and there's this
limo and they get in the car and he says
to the cameraman, "John got us a limo."
I'm not a freaking secretary. I didn't
get him a limo.
So
they're driving through Aman. And he
said it occurred to him that maybe John
didn't get him a limo. So he says to the
driver, "Where are we going?" And the
driver says, "The Royal Palace, his
majesty is a huge fan." And he said,
"These enormous iron gates open up and
they pull into the royal palace
grounds." And here's the king. And he's
standing with the director of the
Jordanian Intelligence Service. So he
gets out of the car and the king says,
"Sasha Baron Cohen, I am your biggest
fan." He said, "Borat,
genius. I didn't think I could make it
through. He said, "Anything that you
need while you're in Jordan,
you talk to this man. He's the head of
the Jordanian Intelligence Service.
He'll take care of anything you want."
And I said, "I told you you hadn't even
landed in the country and they knew that
you were doing this. That's how good
they are." So they were blown. The cover
was blown. Then they go to the hotel.
So,
the plan was
to get these guys into a room,
show them the Polaroids,
and he wanted them to lunge across the
table to strangle him, to beat him.
So, I'm sitting behind the camera.
He's at the table interviewing these
guys
and he's very effeminite in this
character. So he pulls out the the
polaroids and again these are like
hardcore gay, you know, anal
polaroids and he lays them out and uh he
says, "Is this torture? The these men,
they're torturing each other. Should
they be sent to Guantanamo?" And these
guys are old, so they're like they have
their their tri focals on and they're
like one of them picks it up and he goes
like this. He goes,
"Oh, not good. This haram, not good."
And the other one, he hands it the other
one. Oh, no, no, no. This not good. and
they just set it down
and they just look at him like, "Damn
it, nothing's happening."
So, I'm waiting and the cameraman told
me beforehand, "If they react and they
lunge at him, don't move cuz we want the
fight on camera." And then they're like,
you know, looking around, light up
another cigarette. He brings out more
pictures. They were like,
"This not Islam, not good."
And then that was it.
So, we finished the scene and the guys
leave. He paid them, I think he gave
them like a $100 each. And um and I
said, "Well, that was a bust." And he
goes, "Yeah, they didn't they didn't
give a shit." I said, "No, cut the
entire Jordan part out of the movie, the
entire thing." And then, ironically,
they went to Jerusalem. I flew home. It
was in Jerusalem
that Yeshiva students beat the [__] out
of him. And it was the only time in
filming that he dropped character. He
went to the to the Western Wall, you
know, like the holiest site in all of
Judaism,
and he was wearing a leather vest with
no shirt, and he's hairy like a gorilla,
right? So, he's got this leather vest
with no shirt. He has pink hot pants,
like ladies hot pants and leather boots
that come up over his knee. And he goes
to the Western Wall like this. And this
rabbi saw him and then the yeshiva
students were just on him. They beat the
[__] out of him. He had black eyes. His
face was swollen. They had to stop
filming for a week for the for the
swelling to go down. And he's on the
ground. They're kicking him. They're
stomping him. And he he was saying, "I'm
an actor. I'm an actor. It's just a
joke. We're filming a movie." They
didn't care. They didn't care if it was
a joke. And he was an actor. No. You
mess around in certain parts of the
world. And
>> it was daring and gutsy. And I've said
in in previous interviews, I concluded
that the guy was a genius. And I don't
use the term lightly. He was a genius. A
comic genius. First of all, who would
think of something like this? Even if it
didn't work in Jordan, who would even
think of something like this? And then,
you know, you go back to Borat and it
really holds its comedy. It really who
would think to do that
where there are governments issuing
condemnations
of of a movie.
You know, he's driving past the
the embassy of Usbekistan. He's like,
"Fuck you, Beckistan." And they take out
a full page ad in the Washington
Washington Post. They say, "We condemn
this film. We're proud people of
Usbekistan." Come on, genius.
>> You can't not laugh.
>> No way.
>> So, what makes the Jordanians so good?
>> Uh, the ne the necessity to survive.
Fully 50% of the population of Jordan is
Palestinian. They are Palestinian
refugees and the descendants of
refugees. And we know that because if
you're Jordanian, your passport is
green. And if you're Palestinian, your
passport is black. And never the two
shall meet. So in 1968,
there was a Palestinian uh terrorist
group called Black September. And their
goal was to overthrow the Jordanian
monarchy and make Jordan the new
Palestine.
They were fighting literally on the
steps of the palace.
That's how close they got. And the
Jordanians were able to beat them back.
And the Jordanians don't want any more
trouble. And so
they had to develop
arguably the best or second best
intelligence service in the Middle East
just to protect themselves.
We train them, Mossad trains them, the
Saudis train them. And I mean they're
they're great. Truly great.
Yeah.
>> Is there anything that stands out that
they're really good at as far as like
are they really good at ops or analysis
or are they just wellrounded?
>> Ops. They don't even so much care about
the analysis. It's all about ops. You
know, look at it this way. They've got
they've got all these factions, all
these Palestinian factions on top of
having the the PA, the Palestinian
Authority, and Hamas with
representatives there and every other
Palestinian group with representatives
there, you know, the Kudz force and, you
know, this one and that one and Islamic
Jihad and everybody's there. and they
have to allow a simmer
because everybody's going to be bitching
about the Israelis,
but they can't let that simmer turn into
a boil that actually presents a threat
to their own stability. So, it's a
constant balancing act. And the only way
that you're able to pull off a balancing
act like that is to infiltrate every one
of these groups.
And then you really need the economy to
be good enough
so that
hungry people don't get angry.
>> Interesting. Did you ever Does the CIA
do joint ops with the Jordanians?
>> That's that's a question that I'm not
permitted to answer.
I will say I was at a facility once
a facility once with the Jordanians and
um
it was in a very very rural area of the
United States and uh I'm standing with
there was a captain from the Jordanian
intelligence service and a and a deer
walked by and he says to me gazelle is
that a gazelle
and and the funny thing is they only
have gazels in in the Middle East. So
any kind of deer is a gazelle in Arabic.
So I said, "Yeah, it's a it's a
gazelle." I said, "We have millions of
them here. Too many." He says, "Uh,
it's tasty."
I said, "Oh, yeah. Makes a nice makes a
nice stew." So I mentioned to the to the
lead guy, I said, "I I think maybe we
should shoot one of these deer."
I said, "I think these I think the the
Jordanians want to want to eat one." And
he goes, "Cool." Five minutes later, you
hear
And we had a pot. I mean, I'm not
exaggerating when I say they made a pot
of venison stew like this and these guys
ate until they practically burst. Oh my
god, that's great.
>> Like, I didn't think I was going to be
skinning a beer today as part of work.
>> Oh man.
>> Was that uh you and you said that was in
a rural part of the United States? Yeah.
>> Was it near Virginia?
>> No.
>> No. It was out in the sticks.
>> So, one could assume that maybe some
training operations were going on.
One could make that assumption.
You know what was so funny to me?
We had a break. We had a break in. It
was part of it was classroom
instruction. So, we had a break. So, I
go into the men's room. A whole bunch of
guys went to the men's room. Was all
men. And it was one the toilets, the
urinals were these ones that flush
themselves.
So, you know, you take a leak, you walk
away, it flushes itself, you wash your
hands. The Jordanians are standing
there. They're all done.
And they're like pressing the pipe and
tapping the pipe and then they're
punching the pipe because they couldn't
figure out how to flush it.
And they hadn't like like they're still
hanging out. They're just standing there
with their things hanging out like
trying to and I'm trying to explain to
them you can walk away. It it flushes
itself. They just couldn't. And then
finally the the one it was the colonel.
He's like you Americans, you're so
advanced. How do you have these things?
How does it know that you're not there
anymore? I said it's got a little thing
in there. I don't know. I don't know. I
said we've had these for a little while
that it just knows. It knows when you're
when you're all done.
>> That's great.
So, um, what, uh,
not specific, you don't have to say
specific intelligence agency, but is
there any like joint training that
stands out? Like what kind of stuff
would you guys do with other friendly
intelligence services?
>> It depends on the service cuz some are
really good at some stuff and really bad
at others. Um the first job that I had
that I came back where I when I came
back from Athens but before 9/11 was I
uh I was in an instructor in a group
that that trained intelligence services
around the world in counterterrorism
operations. So because of my Arabic and
my field experience in the Middle East,
I handled all the Middle East, but that
was specifically
counterterrorism operations. you know,
busting down doors or if you can't bust
down the door, you put a charge on the
door and blow it open. And we spent
weeks weeks doing surveillance and
counter surveillance.
So, everybody,
I mean, just as a rule of thumb, the CIA
will work with with any country that's
friendly and even some that aren't
friendly so long as you have joint
interests. You know, I've always
maintained, for example,
that there are areas that we can work
with the Russians on right now, even in
a state of war,
>> such as
>> counterterrorism, counter narcotics,
counterprint.
Definitely. Definitely.
So, yeah, we started talking about
started talking about ground branch
um a little bit before. So, I guess just
to kind of start start off there, like
what what is what has been your
experience with ground branch and
special activities and whatever they're
calling it now?
>> Honestly, my experience with all of
those special activities groups was
seeing them in the in the office and
saying, "Hope you had a good weekend."
Those guys, first of all, almost none of
them are career CIA officers. They had
long successful careers in special
forces of some sort, the Navy Seals, the
Army Rangers, you know, whatever, Delta
Force.
And at first, post 911, they were
secunded to the CIA for, you know, quick
strike operations.
And then as the years went by, the
agency decided to make many of them
official. So you put them under global
services or special activities division
or counterterrorism center and um and
they are actually CIA employees. Others
have retired from the military and are
at CIA as contractors.
So it's a much more efficient way of of
bringing them on board. But what they do
is so secret.
I mean, the the nuts and bolts of it is
so secret that they just don't talk
about that stuff. You know what they're
doing. I know what they're doing.
Everybody in the office knows what
they're doing. Nobody mentions it.
>> Can you explain like what it is that
they actually do to people?
>> Yeah. The job is to
kill or kidnap
uh and render anybody who might be a
threat to the United States, to an
American citizen or to an American
installation.
Now, at the top of the food chain, yeah,
we we want those guys to be out there
killing the Osama bin Ladens and the
Imanis of the world. We want them dead.
On the other hand,
you know, mistakes get made
and you've got people being snatched off
the street and rendered to third
countries and then tortured in those
third countries only then to have that
country's intelligence service come back
to the CIA and say, "Look, this is the
wrong guy." And here you've been
torturing him mercilessly for the last
nine months, which has happened
repeatedly.
So on the one hand it's it's great like
you know who was it that said it was it
was Jose Rodriguez the former deputy
director for operations that you need
somebody who's willing to um
who's willing to take these tough
decisions right on the other hand
as as American government officials
we live by the rule of law and by the
constitution.
And so you als
when I think about ground branch or
special activities division, I think
about like you said all those retired
special operations guys, ex Delta Force
guys, ex SEAL team 6 guys that basically
go there to do the same exact [__] that
they were doing,
>> you know, a special operations mission
set like put, like you said before, put
a charge on a door, blow it open, shoot
people in the face, and leave. But then
you hear about things like,
>> we'll get into the MSAD, but that, you
know, they uh that one, it was Khaled
Mashal, the attempted uh assassination
in Jordan
>> where they sprayed him with poison. But
like, so my question is at the CIA, is
it how is special activity structured?
Do they have like specialized units?
>> There are two different special
activities
components.
One is its own division within the CIA's
director of operations called the
special activities division
before 9/11. That's that was that that
were the that was the only one, right?
And they would go do things in the cover
of darkness that nobody talked about.
Then after 9/11, the counterterrorism
center created its own special
activities group. So these were guys
that were on loan to CTC
who would go out and specifically target
terrorists, people who were planning
operations against us.
I left before they could really figure
out who was going to do what over the
long term. So, I don't know how it's
structured. I do know that both
organizations still exist and a lot of
what the special activities guys do in
CTC is not assassinations, it's
kidnappings.
So,
you know, it's it's parachuting in
somewhere,
stealing a van,
and snatching somebody off the street.
and then you meet the helicopter at the
at the uh departure point and then just
fly the guy to wherever it is you're
going to fly him. It's very dangerous,
very very dangerous work cuz you're
you're not snatching people off the
street in Dubai or Abu Dhabi for
example. You're snatch them off the
street in Benghazi or Kartum or you know
Karachi or something. So, a lot of
moving parts, very, very dangerous. And
if CIA people are being killed, we
wouldn't even know it because they get
their star on the wall of honor and
there's no name attached to the star.
So, we we don't really know what's going
on with these groups.
>> So, you said what um people were on loan
to CTC from special activities?
>> No, from the military. Oh.
>> Mhm.
>> Would that be like um I forget what it
was called? The Omega program. Do Do you
Does that ring a bell?
>> I think that was uh
>> You've been after my time.
>> So that was when the CIA worked with uh
JOC components. So I think it was I
think it was mainly Seal Team 6. I want
to say it wasn't
>> uh Delta Force, but JC and
>> the CIA worked together. You know, I
will tell you in CTC at the time post
911.
Picture picture picture this. It's a big
bullpen. Got 150 people all in cubicles.
So many people I've said this before
that we had to name the aisles, right?
So there's like Bin Laden Boulevard.
Seriously, Hezbollah Highway. So you
could tell people, "Oh, I I sit at the
intersection of whatever." Um, and then
around the perimeter of that big bullpen
are all the private offices. You have
the chief CTC, deputy chief for ops,
deputy chief for analysis, deputy chief
for military affairs, and then the group
chiefs, and all the big mucky mucks have
their own small private offices.
Once those guys on loan from say Seal
Team Six came to the office, they never
interacted with any of us.
I mean, not even so much as a good
morning. And so, I mean, we we kind of
knew what these guys were there to do.
We knew who they were. They just
appeared one day, you know, in the weeks
after 9/11 and then they would vanish
for a week at a time or two weeks at a
time and then come back whispering to
each other and not interacting with you.
So, it was pretty easy to figure out who
they were and what they were up to.
I want to talk to you about CTC
specifically, but not related to CTC
necessarily. Was there a point when you
were at the agency after 9/11 where you
saw it turning into a paramilitary
organization?
>> The day after 911.
Seriously, the day after 9/11, Kofheer
Black,
an hour after the attacks began, Kofer
Black stood on a chair right outside of
his office. And
it was dead silent. There were hundreds
of us, silence. And he said, "Today,
we're at war and we're all going to have
to fight. Not all of us are going to
come home."
So if you want to walk out now, walk out
and no one will think less of you.
One woman walked out and then her branch
went to went to the deputy director for
analysis and said, "We don't have
confidence in her leadership." And so
she was removed.
But uh I mean everybody volunteered. It
was literally within 24 hours
that we began this transition into a
paramilitary force. There was no more um
focus on recruiting spies to steal
secrets, right? It was just about
destroying al-Qaeda,
destroying it permanently.
And to tell you the truth, among core
al-Qaeda, that that core of al-Qaeda
that was based in Afghanistan, they were
destroyed by Christmas, right? The
Senate Foreign Relations Committee um
years before I joined it, of course,
came out with a with a study that
probably should have been classified and
wasn't. And they said that by the end of
2001, there were 25 active al-Qaeda
members still in Afghanistan. 25.
It had been destroyed. And everybody
else who had made their way across the
border into Pakistan, we were capturing.
So it was done. Now, of course, there
was al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
There was al-Qaeda in the Islamic
Levant. There was al-Qaeda in North
Africa.
They were all in al-Qaeda inspired. but
but weren't coordinating operations and
and also of course we hadn't yet killed
either Bin Laden or Zawahi but in terms
of al-Qaeda as a fighting force it was
done by Christmas of01
did you did you happen to see um do you
happen to see the bin Laden documentary
>> on Netflix yes
>> dude I uh I I can't tell you how many
people reach out to me and like go did
you see this did you see this and I was
like no I didn't me And then I watched
it and it was cool. It wasn't
necessarily any new information except
for one thing talking about CTC. I
didn't know that uh the Kofheer quote,
the flies on eyeballs thing was at Camp
David
>> and that's how he got the nod over
Rumsfeld in the DoD. That is I didn't
know that. That's a pretty cool story.
>> That is a cool story and everybody
picked it up at the time.
Kofheer I always had deep respect for
Kofheer. We can certainly have
disagreements on policy, but man, what a
patriot.
Um,
Kofheer meant
he was going to see flies on Bin Laden's
eyeballs when he was done.
And um,
you know, you have to you have to
remember too that this was the greatest
intelligence failure in American
history. 3,000 Americans died because we
didn't do our jobs.
And so there was a deep desire for
revenge
after 9/11 which I understood fully and
that's why like everybody else in the
building I kept volunteering over and
over to go to Afghanistan and do
whatever was required of me anything.
And so in the end, you know, we all we
all had our roles, but Kofheer,
I was glad that Kofheer uh headed the
effort rather than Rumsfeld because if
if Rumsfeld had headed it, it would have
been a completely different landscape in
Afghanistan.
>> Yeah.
>> There's a couple things that are in my
head right now, but I have a feeling
people would really want me to ask you
about this. Did you Did you happen to
see Shawn Ryan on Tucker?
>> You did. Okay. So, for people that maybe
haven't, he he talks about um he
interviewed this guy that was a CIA and
FBI agent that is an asset. Sean had him
on his show. And I didn't I didn't watch
the full episode, but just for context,
let's say this guy was um his story and
his credentials were I don't know,
al-Qaeda. Let's say that, right? And
let's say that he's Middle Eastern based
and that's where his story lives. And at
one point he says something to Shawn
about it was either the Russians trying
to proliferate nuclear material or bring
nuclear material somewhere and it was
something alarming related to Russia.
And Sean talks on Tucker about he's like
well I looked at the guy and I asked him
immediately. I was like when is the last
time that you had contact with the
agency? And apparently this guy's story
was that he got burned by the agency.
The agency [__] him. That's what he
claims. So he says, "Well, no, it was,
you know, when they screwed me. That was
the very last time." And Shawn goes,
"Well, I'll tell you what I'm thinking.
If the CIA found out that you were going
to come on this podcast, obviously the
Shawn Ryan show has quite a bit of reach
and he's a uh
I think there's a difference between a
show having a lot of reach and the
show's host being reputable, which in my
opinion, Shawn is. He's very reputable."
Yes. Um
>> Yeah. He's the He's the real McCoy.
>> Yes. I Dude, I modeled this whole show
off of him. I respect him a lot. I think
he's the goat. Anyway, um he asked the
guy, "When's the last time you had
contact with the agency?" Because,
>> good question.
>> He seemed he felt like he just threw
that Russia thing in there and it was
totally out of place. And the theory
would be like if the agency said, "Okay,
you're going on this podcast. Say
whatever you want, just work in this one
thing." And that got the wheels turning
in my head.
>> That's insightful.
>> I just hadn't thought about it that way.
Like you would think there people claim
other famous CIA officers are plants. I
won't say who
uh we don't need to go there, but just
that one nugget.
>> Mhm.
>> What do you think about that? I think
that's a brilliant insight
and I could absolutely see it. 100%
absolutely see it. Yes.
Yes. You know, people talk about
Operation Mockingbird and and the the
CIA's influence over the media.
They don't need to recruit media figures
anymore because the American media just
will gladly take whatever the the CIA
gives them and they'll run with it.
They'll just gist a a CIA press release
and call it call it news.
So, yeah. You know, a friend of mine,
Jason Leupold, I don't know if you know
Jason. He's a he's an investigative
journalist with Bloomberg. He started
off at the LA Times. He went to Vice and
a couple of other different places. This
guy is absolutely brilliant. He's a
gifted writer. He's a dogged
investigator
and breaks big stories. He's the one who
broke the Hillary Clinton email server
story. And the way he did it, the way he
does it every time is he files these
gigantic Freedom of Information Act
requests knowing that the agency is
never going to respond within the 60
days or 90 days or whatever it is. And
so he sues them every time and he wins
every time.
And so
he filed a Freedom of Information Act
request asking for
all correspondence between the CIA's
Office of Public Affairs and
all American journalists, period, from
this date to that date. And they didn't
respond. And he sued and the judge ruled
in his favor and they had to just turn
over everything. and he found such
interesting information. He found
first there was a um a reporter who
wrote a story that was a little bit
anti-CIA.
And so the CIA emailed them and said,
"You better not publish this. If you
publish this, so help me God. You will
never be invited to the Christmas party
ever again and we will not comment on
any of your stories." And so he
withdrew.
They don't need to recruit the guy to
kill the story. They just threaten him.
Another thing that he found was Ken
Delaneian, who is the chief national
security correspondent at NBC News and
MSNBC.
He was writing articles about the agency
and then he was sending the articles to
the agency for clearance before he sent
them to his own editor.
That is absolutely unacceptable.
So, they don't need to recruit anybody
in the media, they already own everybody
in the media. And if you're anti- agency
and you're not working for a well-unded
media outlet, you're screwed cuz you're
just not going to be able to get your
message out there. That's why we're so
fortunate to have people like Matt
Taibbe, for example, who's able to get
his message out thanks to Substack.
You know, we need we need a thousand
Matt Taibbe, not these weaklings who are
just going to take whatever the CIA
gives them and gist it and put their
name on the by line and then we find
ourselves propagandized by the agency.
>> I mean, that's the thing, man. Now that
I'm thinking about it, if you're an
independent podcaster and like me, I am
my team. I don't have a team. I don't
have a team of producers like Tucker to
try to verify
>> That's right. prior.
So, first of all, I would say the onus
is on people, individuals that listen to
what they listen to to decide what they
want to believe. That needs to be number
one.
>> And let me interrupt you on that point
cuz that's a very very important point
that I hope everybody takes to heart.
>> You can't trust anybody. And so, you
have to trust yourself. And the only way
you can trust yourself is to consume
everything.
You know, I get up in the morning,
people, friends of mine accuse me of
being too mainstream, and I'm actually
not mainstream. But you have to know
what the mainstream is saying so that
you can refute it. So, as soon as I wake
up in the morning, I read the Washington
Post, the New York Times, the LA Times,
the Wall Street Journal, and then I go
to CNN, Fox, The Guardian, a couple of
others. I read the Greek papers just
because I'm Greek and I have an interest
in it. And then I go to the blogs and
the substacks and stuff like that. You
have to consume everything and have
confidence in your own intellect. So you
can read something and say, "Ah, that's
[__] That's just not true." And
then you read something else, you say,
"That's plausible. That makes sense. I'm
going to watch that issue." Because who
you going to believe? You going to
believe Kendallian,
right? I'm not. You gonna believe the
Washington Post? I like uh Ella
Nakushima and Joby Warick, but then
that's pretty much it. There maybe are
one or two people at the New York Times.
Nobody at the LA Times anymore.
So, you you've got to be confident in
your own ability to discern what's true
or what's not true or you just get
overwhelmed
with what is likely to turn out to be
propaganda.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, dude. I mean, shoot. I don't I
don't know how to uh you know, I think
guest selection as a podcast host is an
important one. You can't just platform
anybody. But at the same time,
>> isn't that the truth?
>> There is an argument to be made that
again, I think, you know, each
individual draws the line as you do. You
have a show.
>> Um, and you know, it's for you or I to
say where that line is. But at the end
of the day, you know, information is out
there. Make up your mind on your own.
>> Yeah, that's it. like like uh we talked
about Scott Horton a minute ago. Um I've
become something of a like a
semi-regular on the Pierce Morgan uh
show and uh the last time I was on it
was like a last minute thing cuz
somebody dropped out. So they said, "Can
you come on in 15 minutes?" I said,
"Sure." So I I log on and I see Scott
and I was like, "Oh, thank God Scott's
here." Okay. So this is going to be a
serious discussion.
Yeah. So, he wasn't scheduled to be like
he's like a fill in, you mean? Or
>> Yeah, he and I were both fillins. But,
as soon as I saw Scott Horton, I
thought, "Okay, this is going to be a
serious intellectual conversation."
>> Do you know anything? I think it was
Scott that mentioned this. Um, it might
have been Scott or Daryl Cooper,
actually. I Which Okay, I don't I don't
know what Daryl Cooper has been for.
I'll say that. I I listen to a lot of
Tucker. I I like Tucker's podcast.
>> I like Tucker a lot.
>> It was one of the
>> He goes deep, too.
>> Yeah. Say what you want about Tucker. I
don't give a [__] I'm just telling you
I listen to his podcast sometimes and
these two guys, one of them said
something about the National Endowment
for Democracy.
>> Do you know anything about that?
>> I and I believe the context was that it
was a proxy for the CIA.
>> Yeah, it is.
>> What does that mean?
>> The National Endowment for Democracy has
taken many millions of dollars from the
CIA to promote American propaganda.
uh mainstream American government
propaganda. So when it talks about
things like nation building, it's not
really talking about nation building.
It's talking about encouraging the
development of leaders in foreign
countries that are going to be knee-jerk
supporters of the US and US foreign
policy.
So it's mainly a
propaganda scop sort of machine for lack
of better term. It's not like actual
boots on the ground type operations.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Not not at all boots on
the ground. Okay. Not at all.
>> No.
>> You know, when we liberated Kuwait in
1991,
I I've told you in the past, I went in
with the Marines on Liberation Day. It
was very, very exciting. One of the
highlights of my life, my adult life.
And then within days of Kuwait being
liberated, these Americans just kind of
show up and they came to the embassy to
register and then we would bump into
each other at events.
Remember the country is literally on
fire. The Iraqis had blown up all the
oil wells and there are these giant, you
know, 100 foot high flames gushing out
of the ground. It turned out these
people were from the Democratic National
Committee and the Republican National
Committee. I'm like, 'What are you doing
here? And they said, 'Well, oh, we're
here to help them transition to
democracy. Well, it's a it's a monarchy.
It's not going to be they have this
little elected, you know, melwatan and
national assembly, but it's not going to
ever be democratic.
Well,
I was in my 20s then, not really savvy
enough to know that this is all part of
the plan. You use the National Endowment
for Democracy. You use, you know, NPR,
you use the DNC and the RNC, and you all
smile and get along and go to cocktail
parties, and it's all just to promote
American propaganda. I I worked with a
guy briefly, John Rendan, God bless him,
awesome guy, and I asked him one time,
this is before he hired me to do a
contract. I asked him what he did. He
said, "Oh, I'm a professional
propagandist."
I said, "What does that mean?" And he
said, 'Well, you were in Kuwait on
liberation day.' And I said, 'Yeah.' He
said, 'You remember when the American
tanks are rolling down the the main
street, the Cornesh? I said, ' And he
said, and a million people are out there
waving little American flags. I said,
yeah. He said, where the hell do you
think those flags came from?
The country's destroyed. It's It's
Liberation Day, but everybody has
American flag, and they're all waving
their little flags.
And I was like, you know what? I never
even thought of it.
>> Mhm.
It's a good living in propaganda.
>> What What was the contract that he asked
you to do? When was this?
>> Oh,
he hired me in 2008. Uh I'm I'm not I'm
not proud of this. He hired me in 2008
to work with Carl Rove of all people.
Carl Rove, who had run the George W.
Bush campaigns, both of them, to work on
a presidential campaign in Indonesia.
So, it was a guy named
General
Jooko Widodo.
That was his name. And
I was the good cop cuz I'm always the
good cop. And Carl was the bad cop. So,
we fly into Singapore and then we
helicopter over to uh Jakarta. You can
see Indonesia. It's right across the
water. So, this guy owns a chain of
Holiday Inn. He's a former chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff of Indonesia.
And um and Carl's like, "Yeah, you know,
we can do this and we can do that. We've
got TV commercials and radio
commercials." And I said, "Wait a
minute, wait a minute, wait a I said,
'General,
with all due respect,
there's video of you on YouTube stabbing
six peaceful protesters in the heart.
How do we get past that? You're You
murdered six college students because
they participated in a peaceful
pro-democracy demonstration. I said,
you're banned from the United States for
human rights reasons. We can't just
pretend it didn't happen.
And so I know, right? So the job was um
that I was going to write these op-eds
saying, "Oh, he's misunderstood." And so
I wrote these op-eds. No one would
publish them.
>> You did this.
>> I That's what he paid me to do. And he
paid me very handsomely.
>> So I wrote these op-eds. We sent them to
like the Wall Street Journal, the LA
Times,
the New York Times. and people were
like, "No, we're not touching this." So,
nothing ever came of it. He ended up he
was running for president and we we
needed to rehabilitate his reputation.
He's a murderer
and um in the end he dropped out of the
race and got himself elected vice
president,
but the ban the the American ban on his
travel was never lifted. He was never
welcomed in the United States again.
Yeah. He lined these guys up. It was six
college students. He li he lined them up
and one by one stabbed each of them in
the heart.
Yeah. Not good.
>> I guess they didn't have a a plethora of
wonderful candidates if that was the guy
that they wanted to choose.
>> Indonesia is a tough gig and it has a
lot of people.
>> Good god, man.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I respect the fact that you shared
that. And to to our point about
nonsense, you know, if you were sticking
to a narrative,
>> then you probably wouldn't have. So, I
appreciate that you did and that speaks
to me about
>> I'm not proud of it. But I had just
blown the whistle on the torture
program. I lost my job. I had five kids.
I had four kids at the time and I
really, really needed an income. And so
this opportunity comes, you know, hey,
would you take 25 grand to write four
op-eds? And I said, yes, definitely.
Um, going back to Tucker again, when you
were on Tucker, I think it was you
mentioned that there is agency
psychologists that you can take with you
on ops
>> to again going back to what we were
talking about before, find that crack
and make it wider.
>> Yes.
>> What like what would they help you with?
>> I have to tell you the the one operation
that I did with a with an agency
psychologist was the most fun I have
ever had in a single operation.
We had a walk-in.
We had a walk A walk-in is somebody who
literally walks in to an to an American
embassy off the street and says, "I have
intelligence I want to pass to the CIA."
95% of them are lunatics.
the the other 5% are intelligence
peddlers who just want you to give them
a couple hundred dollars and then they
go to the British embassy and the
Russian embassy and the French embassy
and the Israeli embassy and they just do
the same thing and then that's a month's
salary, right? Um some are uh
probes from terrorist groups or enemy
countries. They're just looking to see
where the cameras are, how thick the
doors are, who's armed or not armed, how
far into the embassy they can get before
they're stopped.
But most of them are just lunatics.
And then there's 1% that's the real
deal. If you look historically
by reading Cold War era memoirs, the
best recruits the CIA has ever had were
walk-ins because you don't know who this
Russian KGB colonel is. You're never
going to encounter him. But then one day
he just walks into an embassy somewhere
and says, "I'm a KGB colonel and I want
to give you everything I have and I want
a million dollars." And you say, "I'll
get the giant sack of money." you start
writing. You know, I'm being facitious,
of course, but not too much. So, we had
a walk-in who said that he had seen an
assassination.
He he said that he's driving down this
highway and he has to take a leak. And
so, he pulls off an exit and there's
this old abandoned church there and he
parks his car behind this big banyan
tree and he takes he's taking a leak.
And while he's taking a leak,
a van pulls up.
A bunch of guys get out of the back of
the van.
The source sees two motorcycles in the
back of the van. And here's one of the
guys say, "Does he still live?" And the
other one says, "He should be dead by
now."
So
he says, "I think this was this
terrorist group that you guys are
after." And we said, "Will you sit with
a sketch artist?" He said, "Yes."
And he did the sketches and they were
really, really close to photographs we
had of people that we suspected were in
this terrorist group.
So, we turned him over to the FBI and
the FBI interviewed him and they said,
"He's full of [__] He's nuts. We're
done.
Well, we just took him back and we said,
"How about if we fly to London,
we have a nice dinner, everybody's
relaxed, we're all friends, and we talk
about this in more detail." He said,
"Great." So, we fly him to London. He
was so poor, the poor guy. I remember
this. He flew to London. was freezing
and he didn't own a coat. So, I went out
and bought him a coat uh just so he
wouldn't, you know, be frozen solid by
the end of the the 3 or 4 days. So, I
flew out to London with two
psychologists, but one of the
psychologists was a licensed hypnotist
and um
and I flew out there with another case
officer. So, we both spoke the language
and so we're going to act as translators
for the hypnotist.
It's hard work being a translator. And
let me tell you, and you have to be like
speaking like this. We're going to count
backwards. 10
9 8. It's very hard.
So
the night before
we go out to some bookstore, we go to a
nice restaurant without the guy. The guy
hasn't arrived yet. So just the agency
people. We went out. This is going to be
our plan. We're going to, you know, have
all the lights off. We're going to be in
the darkened hotel room. Speak very
softly. We're going to put them under.
And I said, "Come on." I said, I said,
"Hypnosis isn't really a thing, right?
It always just seemed like [__] to
me." And he said, "No, no, no." He said,
"We're going to we're going to really
put them under." And he said, 'You know,
the funny thing is that smart people go
under much more quickly than stupid
people do, which I still don't fully
understand. But he said, "We're going to
we're going to ask him all these
questions." I said, "Well, how long does
this last?" He said, "If if we get them
under quickly,
we could do this for two and a half or
three hours." I'm like, "Okay, this is
going to be tough being the translator."
So the guy arrives and you know welcome
this is Dr. So and so this is the other
doctor so and so and you know my
colleague and so you know get
comfortable you need a drink or you've
used the bathroom we're going to we're
going to hypnotize you to help you
remember some of the things that you saw
that day.
So,
this is one of the wackiest things that
ever I ever witnessed at the agency.
So,
I was the first translator and I told
him, "We're going to count backwards
from 10 and just relax and think about
the numbers." Right? So, we start and he
said, "I want you to raise your hand
like this." And it wasn't propped. It
was up in the air like this. And he
said, "Don't put your hand down until I
tell you to."
He held his arm there for 3 hours.
It was inhuman.
A conscious person couldn't do it.
So, the guy is out before we get to
zero, counting back from 10. So,
I start asking him questions. Okay, you
pull off the exit. You drive to the
church. The church is right off to the
side of the road. You go behind the
banyan tree.
Then what are you doing? He said, "I'm
peeing."
And then what happens? A van pulls up.
What does the van look like? It's
painted red and it has some rust spots
over the the rear wheels.
Then what do you see?
The back doors open. I see two
motorcycles and two men inside. I said,
"Can you see a license plate?" This
freaks me out. Oh, I got chills just
thinking about it. I said, "Can you see
a license plate?" He says, "Yes." And
his he's like this with his eyes closed.
I said, "What does the license plate
say?" And he goes,
and then he reads off the plate.
So, I write it down. I hand it to my
colleague. He goes into the other room
and he calls headquarters. He says, "We
need to run a plate ASAP."
So, headquarters sends an immediate
cable out to the field. Call liaison.
Run this plate right now. And the plate
comes back stolen.
I couldn't [__] believe it. I
couldn't believe it. And he's like this
the whole time. So, I said, "Are the men
talking?" "Yes." "What are they saying?
Does he still live? He should be dead by
now.
And then what happens? And he says,
"They see me."
I said, "They see you. Did they approach
you?" He said, "Yes." And one punches me
in the face.
And then what? He said, "I'm bleeding."
And I told them, "I didn't hear
anything." And he went on like this. It
was this long, elaborate three-hour long
story.
So I took notes, like ridiculous, you
know, filled a notebook full of notes.
I called my boss at headquarters. I
said, "This is the craziest thing I've
ever seen." And my boss says, "I'm
freaking out over the stolen license
plate." He goes, "This may be the real
deal."
I I write all the notes. I go back to
the station in London. I I write all the
notes and I send it back out into the
field and they're like, "Oh my god, the
details incredible. Okay, we're going to
try to get with him when he returns to
country." So, a couple of weeks pass
and then he triggers a meeting
and so my colleague who I'd been with in
London flies out to meet with him and
the guy says, "They know who I am. They
kidnapped me and they took me to a house
and they beat me."
And we're like, "Okay, where where was
the house? When did this happen? How
many of them were there? What did they
look like? Were this were they the same
guys you saw at the church? He answered
all these questions.
And I said to my colleague, I said,
"This doesn't make sense because the
only way they would know who he was is
if they were, you know, with us.
We knew where he lived, but there's no
way that they would know.
It just didn't make any sense."
So, I go to the FBI
and it there's this one agent. She's
actually big mucky muck now in the FBI.
And she goes, "You CIA people, you all
have your heads up your asses," she
said. And I said, "No, you FBI people."
I said, "You think everybody's lying to
you." I said, "We're going to get medals
when we crack this case." And she goes,
"Ah, you people." So, she wasn't helpful
to me.
Then he calls a second time and he says
um that they kidnapped him again, but he
had a tape recorder on him and the tape
recorder was in his pocket and he
recorded the whole encounter. We're
like, "Okay,
that's way too good to be true, but
let's listen to the tape." So,
we play the tape and he's like, it's his
voice and he says, "Hey, I know you.
Don't hurt me." And then also his voice,
"I am the minister of public order and I
demand that you tell me about the CIA
people that you're meeting with." And I
was like, "Motherfucker,
you made the whole [__] thing up,
didn't you?
So, we decided to fly him back out to
London. Oh, let me finish the first part
first. So, he's got his arm like this.
And the hypnotist says, "I'm going to
count backwards to five and then you're
going to wake up." And he goes 5 4 3 2
1. And he wakes up and his arm falls and
he looks around and he says, "What
happened?" And then he goes
and then vomits all over himself. So he
runs into the bathroom in the hotel room
to clean himself up. And the hypnotist
who was like 110 years old, he goes,
"You know, I've read about this in the
literature, but I've never seen it
happen." I said, "I can't believe he
held his arm up like that for 3 hours.
It was nuts."
So anyway, we fly him back out to
London.
We said, "No more [__] You made
this up." "No, no, it was the Minister
of Public Order. He's with the
terrorists." We're like, "No, we we ran
a spectros a spectroscope on this. It's
it's you with your hand over your mouth
to try to make a different voice." And
he's like, "Oh, well, my wife has cancer
and I I was hoping that if you believed
me that you would pay for her cancer
treatment and I wanted her to go to the
Mayo Clinic." And we're like, "Doesn't
work that way."
And then the FBI just says, "I told you,
you [__] idiots. I told you three
months ago it was a lie." So I was like,
"Yeah, okay. Well, you win this one."
But the hypnosis part was actually that
was real
>> that that he saw something at the church
that day. It probably wasn't the
terrorists,
but it was something unourred. It was
probably a bunch of guys that stole two
motorcycles.
>> That is spooky, dude. And like you hear
about um
>> you hear the a about the agency taking a
crack at like this remote viewing stuff,
>> right? Since the 50s.
>> Yeah. I uh I've kind of not looked into
it, but like I've heard a couple people
talk about it in interviews. Um I don't
really know what to make of it, but as
far as like spooky [__] like that, like
what what do you make of it?
It was kind of the craze in the 1950s,
you know, ESP and UFOs and astral
projection and moving items with your
mind. And and the CIA had a an endless
budget. There was no such thing as an
oversight committee to say, "Hey, this
is a waste of the taxpayers's money."
And I I'll tell you what really was the
was the motivator for the CIA is is the
Chinese
were successful in planting
disinformation in the CIA that the
Russians were developing the same
technology.
So we were like, "Oh my god, we
recruited this Chinese intelligence guy
and he said the KGB is already doing it.
We have to catch up to the KGB wasn't
doing anything. They had never heard of
this stuff." And then the Manurion
candidate came out and freaked everybody
out in the mid50s.
So the CIA spent millions and millions
of dollars experimenting with everything
from remote viewing to to
you know UFOs and
all this crap just lumped into one thing
and nothing ever came of it. I mean that
this is how MK Ultra was created where
okay let's start with LSD. There's this
new thing called LSD that this Swiss
scientist accidentally invented and you
can see crazy [__] when you take it and
maybe we can micro dose it to make
people do what we want them to do like
under hypnosis but without them
realizing that they're doing it and then
we can double them back against the KGB.
And then people are jumping out of hotel
windows and they're killing their
families and losing their minds. And and
then as part of MK Ultra, there was like
MK Chickwit and MK
Seesaw and there was a whole bunch of
them, like a half a dozen of them under
MK Ultra where, you know, we we created
a germ in a lab and we just blew it into
the atmosphere in San Francisco just to
see if anybody would get sick. And lots
of people got sick. 11 of them were sick
enough that they happened to be to need
hospitalization.
And it turned out that they all suffered
from the same rare respiratory
infection. And the doctors are like,
"Where the heck did this come from?"
Well, the CIA had it in a big tube and
they were shooting it into the fog. And
they did it in San Francisco because the
fog is heavy and they knew that the fog
would keep the germ close to the ground
where people are breathing it in.
And then the CIA said, "You know what we
should do? We should hire a whole bunch
of prostitutes and rent a rent a cat
house, a safe house, and we get these
prostitutes to bring John's back to the
back to the cat house. And then we dose
them with LSD and see if we can control
their minds. These are American
citizens. You can't just dose somebody
with LSD." And oh, let's see. Is he
going to go crazy? Is he going to kill
himself? Is he going to confess to, you
know, his deepest, darkest secrets?
Like, what the [__] wrong with people?
But we did that from 1952 to 1975.
And then in 75, when the Church
Committee realized that this program had
been going on for more than two decades,
Senator Frank Church ordered the CIA,
"Do not destroy the documents."
And so they immediately destroyed the
documents. There were about 20% of the
documents that had been misplaced and
were found later. So what we know about
MK Ultra today is just from the 20% that
survived. Everything else was destroyed.
And then they were like, "Yeah, well,
they're destroyed. What are you going to
do about it?"
>> That's the insane part is it's such a
fraction of the available information
and there's all of this stuff and you
think about stuff like the psychic
driving stuff is so gnarly,
>> right? Well, now com now compare psychic
driving with the technologies that we
have
and you've created a monster. You know,
when the when the vault 7 uh documents
were released back in what was it 2017?
>> What are those? Um, there was a uh a CIA
computer engineer who named Joshua
Schulty who swears that he's innocent,
but is now serving a sentence of 40
years for espionage. He was apparently
allegedly a disgruntled engineer. He
didn't like his boss. He didn't like his
co-workers. They didn't like him.
So he just
downloaded the crown jewels of the
director of science and technology and
sent it all to Wikileaks in 2017. Google
Vault 7. Vault 7 documents. Vault 7
revelations. It will knock your socks
off.
Um thousands and thousands of pages. It
makes what Chelsea Manning leaked look
like, you know, scrawl from a sixth
grader.
So, he revealed that the CIA has
developed technologies to, for example,
remotely take over your car by hacking
into the chip, right? Why would the CIA
want to take over your car? To make you
drive off a bridge, maybe? To make you
drive into a tree and kill yourself? to
make you drive into an abutment and make
sure that there's no way you can survive
because they've got the thing going 140
miles an hour and you can't control it.
They develop technology to
to reverse your smart TV to make the
speaker into a microphone with the TV
still appearing to be off so you don't
know that it's broadcasting everything
that's being said in your house to CIA
headquarters.
you know, they were able to they were
able to hack into other count's um most
sensitive technological systems and to
leave little scraps of code, but the
scraps of code are written in Russian or
in Persian, in Farsy.
So people say, "Oh, the [__] Russians
hacked into us or the Chinese or the
Iranians." And actually, no, it it was
us, but you'll never know it.
I mean, there's almost too much in Vault
7 to even go into. It's incred. I'm
going to give a talk about it at at a
hacker conference this coming weekend.
So, um,
you know, couple what the CIA was trying
to do in the 50s with MK Ultra and its
subcomponents compared to what it is
technologically able to do today. And it
is terrifying.
Terrifying.
>> Damn, dude. Yeah, that is uh that is
gnarly.
Um
going back to the the psychologist,
what
what kind of psychological pro Okay, let
me let me frame it up before they ask
the question. Let's say you recruit me
as an asset. I work in, you know, the
Iranian embassy somewhere and you meet
me at a cocktail party and I say, "Oh,
John, this this guy is he's he's a
wonderful guy. I'm going to get to know
him a little bit."
>> Yeah.
>> And we become best friends, as you say,
over 6, nine months, whatever the period
is.
>> Y
>> and you pitch me one day.
>> Mhm.
>> And
what I'm getting at is what is the
psychological process that an asset goes
through? like what kind of crisis goes
on as this happens?
>> Yeah, that's a great question.
There's a there's a little dance that's
happening here. I I asked one of my
instructors when I first went into the
operational training, what percentage of
people that you have pitched in your
career said yes. He said 100%.
He said, "If you are not 100% certain
that this guy's going to say yes, run
for the hills because he's going to out
you. You're going to get arrested.
You're going to get expelled from the
country. He's going to report you to his
own intelligence service and then you're
not going to be able to travel to half
the countries in the world." That
happened to a colleague of mine where
you we we all read each other's cables
and we're like, "Dude, keep up the good
work, man. You're going to get them.
next meeting you're going to get him
right. So I'm reading my colleagueu's
cables and it's it couldn't be going any
better and he asks headquarters
permission. You have to get permission
to make the actual pitch.
It's very paperwork heavy. So
headquarters says go for it. Go with
God. And he makes the pitch. And the guy
literally runs screaming from the room.
And next thing you know, his ambassador
calls our ambassador and his government
lodges a formal diplomatic complaint
with our government. What are you going
to do? You're going to say, "Yeah, my
guy's an undercover CIA guy, so you
can't say that." So you say, "No, no,
no, no, no. This is just a
misunderstanding. It was a language
thing. Our guy doesn't really speak your
language very well, and your guy doesn't
speak English very well." This was just
an innocent misunderstanding. But we
understand if you're upset, so we're
going to instruct our guy not to ever
talk to your guy again.
That's uncomfortable.
Besides the fact that you look like an
idiot at headquarters because you've
been telling us for 9 months how well
things are going and in fact the guy
never had any intention of allowing you
to recruit him. Like what have you been
doing all this time?
You're supposed to be whining him and
dining him and showing him the better,
finer things in life so that he says,
"Hey, you know, I'm kind of liking I
make $500 a month. This guy's ordering
$200 bottles of wine and he paid for us
to go on vacation and he bought me a
Rolex. I'm going to say yes to this."
And in fact, he says not just no, but oh
hell no.
So
what you're looking for is a
vulnerability. This is this is a very
important word in the what's called the
the asset acquisition cycle. The asset
acquisition cycle is spot, assess,
develop, recruit. I spot you at a
diplomatic cocktail party. I assess that
you have access to information that I
that I want. I develop you by creating
this friendship and then I recruit you.
Now, by the time I recruit you, you know
exactly what's going on. You're not an
idiot.
And why am I spending all this money on
you? You know, where am I getting all
this money? Rolexes and you know, fancy
vacations and
what's up? So, you're not an idiot. You
know what's happening here.
And so, you do it very gently. And I
say, "Dalton, listen. You know how I
feel about you. You're my best friend.
I love you. I love your wife. My wife
loves you. My wife loves your wife. Our
kids are friends. We're going to be
friends forever. But I haven't been 100%
honest with you. And
I hope you're not going to be upset, but
I'm actually a CIA officer undercover.
That's called breaking cover. And I I
hope you're okay with that.
I know you're going to be okay with that
because you know exactly where this is
going. I've already identified your
vulnerability. Maybe your kid is sick
and needs medical treatment in the
United States. Maybe your kid wants to
go to school in the United States. I can
get your kid accepted to literally any
university in America and I'll pay for
it.
any university in America
100% paid so long as you keep giving me
and my you know colleagues who replace
me and replace each other what they ask
for.
Um
so I take you off to the side and I say
listen just for your protection
we can't be seen as friends anymore. our
relationship has to become clandestine
from this point on.
>> And so we're going to meet once a month
at a predetermined site at a
predetermined time and date and then
we'll carry on from there. Now, if
you're from an enemy country, I don't
want you to defect. That's the last
thing I want because if you defect, your
value ends today because you lose your
access. Well, I don't care what was
happening yesterday. I want to know what
your country's going to do tomorrow.
Right? So, the goal is
let's say you and I are stationed in uh
you know, Bogotaa.
I want you to go back to Iran or Russia
or China
or Cuba
and you're going to take with you
a bedroom a bedroom set that I give you,
right? And the dresser
is going to have a
a transmitting device embedded in the
back of it. And so
you're going to type your reports onto a
chip. You put the chip in the device.
You hit a button that's hidden in the
back of the drawer and it does a burst
transmission that lasts about a half of
a second or a tenth of a second. And
it's going to send your report back to
CIA headquarters. And because the burst
only lasts for a tenth of a second,
nobody's going to be able to intercept
it.
They're going to say, "Oh, there was
just a transmission. It lasted a tenth
of a second. We have no idea where it
came from."
Because once you get back to Iran or
Cuba or Russia or China or whatever,
I want you to tell me what's going on
every single day in your office. And
then I want you to try to get a
promotion and then get transferred to
the Office of American Affairs. And I
want the names of everybody in that
office. I want to know the names of
their sources inside the United States
so the FBI can start arresting them. And
then we take it from there. And then I
can pay you in any way you want. You
know, we can open an account at the CIA
credit union, which we're very happy to
do, or we can give it to you in gold or
diamonds or Bitcoin or, you know,
however you want to handle it. We'll
give it to you.
How many of them h Okay, so I'm just
thinking like an asset they a lot of
them are probably very prideful, right?
I know a big a big vulnerability is I'm
the smartest guy in the room. I'm
>> I got passed over for promotion and I'm
going to show them.
>> So they fancy themselves as smart
people. Oh yeah. Shrewd perceptive.
>> Very much so.
>> And yet they didn't see this coming.
>> Yeah. So internalizing that, how many of
them want to know if it was a setup from
the start and like do they ask you for
like a face saving thing? You know what
I mean?
>> None of them want to know that that they
were duped into this or that they walked
right into it, right? So what you do in
every single meeting is you tell them
how important they are. your information
is so important it's going directly to
the president of the United States. I
made a a guy cry once in a meeting. So
he gave me some information and it was
good. It was the the analysts were happy
with it. It helped fill in a couple of
gaps.
He thought it was the greatest
information that's ever been passed to
the American government. So I said,
"Listen," I go, "Buddy, your information
went directly to the president of the
United States." He said, "You're kidding
me." I said, "No, directly to the
president." I said, "I wrote the report.
I sent it to the White House." He looked
at the report. What did he say? I said,
"The president read the report and he
said, "You're kidding me." He goes like
this. Oh my god.
So I I write this up. I said, "Oh, I
told him it went to the president." My
boss says, "You want to have some fun?"
He goes, "Dummy up a uh an award
certificate, put the CIA seal on it."
So, I said, "Oh, that would be fun." So,
I did a I did a in in just in word, you
know, and clip art. So, I did this, you
know, Central Intelligence Agency,
United States of America. I had the
guy's name, uh, certificate of whatever.
You put the CIA seal on it, and then I
just forged the director's name because
how's he going to know what the
director's signature looks like? So, I
go to the meeting the next month, and I
said, "I told you last month that your
information went directly to the
president of the United States." And he
said, "Yes."
I said, "I have something for you from
the director of the Central Intelligence
Agency." And I give him this phony
certificate. He looks at it and he
bursts into tears
and I said, "Congratulations, my
friend." I said, "But listen, you know,
I have to take this back and keep it in
the safe because you can't be seen with
this. You'll be killed." He goes, "Of
course. Of course." I can't believe it.
Oh my god. Oh man.
I had him hooked. He was ready to name
his kids after me. That's how successful
it was. But you just play on their egos
and they eat it up. They eat it up
because they're all narcissists anyway.
Not all, but you know, most of them are
narcissists. They need to be stroked.
So after you after you assess what the
vulnerability is, right, you like, you
know, actually let me ask that first. is
how much of how much of the work is done
on the front end by analysts and
targeting officers versus you in the
field asking discovery questions?
>> None of it.
None of it's done by them. No, none of
it. Um I shouldn't say none. 99% of it
is is not done by them. When I was an
analyst,
I have to be very careful with my
language here.
When I was an analyst,
NSA
sent us a series of intercepts.
And being the analyst, I'm the only one
really in the building who's paying
close close attention to everything
that's happening. They call it all
source intelligence with these
players.
I went to my boss and I said,
"I'm going to go out on a limb and I
think these two guys are planning to
defect to the United States." And he
said, "Okay, based on what?" and I built
my case. I had never done this before.
And he said, "You need to write a top
secret eyes only cable
to the near east operational division
chief." I said, "I don't even know what
that format looks like." So he gave me
an exemplar. So I started writing top
secret cover sheet on it, the most
sensitive document that an analyst can
write. And I said, I think these two
guys are planning to defect,
and I think if we can get to them before
their defection,
we can double them back and make them
double agents.
So, I just cuz I was an idiot and I was
young and I didn't know any better, I
just stuck it in an inner office mail
envelope and sent it to the director of
Near East Operations. Sure enough, the
next day he calls me. Are you the
analyst who wrote this? And I said,
'Yes. He said, 'Come and see me. So I go
up there, and this is one of those guys
that's serious enough and senior enough
that you know, I called him sir. So I go
up there and he said, lay this out for
me and start from the beginning. So I
did. These were not people
that his people were watching.
They were a little bit too lowle.
So I laid it out. I said, "If if you
pitch them,
I think you can double them back.
If we wait too much longer, like another
couple of months, I think it's going to
be too late."
So he convened this task force
of officers and they went out and just
cold pitched them both.
One of them immediately agreed. The
other one defected to Canada.
And my boss is like, "That's that was
actionable analysis."
And I said, 'You know, I I read these
guys transcripts day after day after day
and they're bitching about this and
bitching about that and I thought they
don't want to go home.
And so we we got them. Well, we got one
and the Canadians got one. Yeah.
But that was very very unusual. It's
it's 99% of the time it's the case
officer in the field, but case officers
in the field would never have
encountered either one of these guys.
>> So why did you choose your words so
carefully with that one? Just because it
was NSA related
>> and it's sources and methods.
>> Okay.
Okay. So similar question to being in
the field then
you've let's let's say you've identified
that somebody's got you know they have a
sick child or whatever whatever the
vulnerability is. Is there like
is there intangibles that how do you how
do you smell blood so to speak with
who's recruitable and who isn't?
>> Oh man it can be just a single
off-handed comment. I'll give you one
example.
I was talking to this guy
who had access that I wanted and I'm
thinking this guy's not recruitable.
He's given me nothing.
And then he said
he was cheating on his wife and how
expensive it was.
I was like, "Okay, done. Done and done."
Yeah.
I offered him a certain amount of money.
He asked for double because he wanted to
get her an apartment and there were
associated expenses and that way he
wouldn't be out of pocket 1 cent. So at
Cabled Headquarters they said just give
it to him. So I gave it to him.
That was it. I I recruited a guy once. I
met this guy at a at a Oh my god. I I I
never turned down an invitation. I'm
going to like the engineers ball and you
know the newspaper
society uh you know Halloween event
[__] that would bore you senseless
because you just never know who you're
going to meet at these things. So I'm at
one of these it actually was the
engineers ball.
you know, engineers are all introverts
and they're all just kind of standing
there, you know, looking at their shoes
and
walking up to the buffet table. And so I
go up to this guy, I said, "Hi, how are
you?" John Kiryaku from the American
Embassy. Hi, how are you? We exchange
cards. I said, "Oh, you work in the
port. How interesting." Oh, no. It's
very boring. I said, "No, no, ships
coming and going all the time and stuff
from all over the world." Well, I said,
"That's very exciting."
And he's like, "No, it's it's not."
Well, I'm very interested in what's
coming.
>> Yes.
>> And I said, "Your English is so good.
Where'd you learn how to speak English?
Uh, it's it's accentless American
English." He said, "Oh, I went to school
in Chicago. I went as a foreign exchange
student uh with uh AFS, American Field
Service, I think is what it's called.
And then he said I I stayed uh for
college at I forget where it was like
the University of
University of Illinois Champagne or
Bana. Is that is that what it's called?
>> I said, "Oh, that's great." I said, "I
love Chicago. it's such a great, you
know, metropolitan area and some of the
best food and you just have to just roll
with it, right? And he says, "I became
obsessed
with the Chicago Bulls." I said, "Oh,
yeah. Well, Jordan, I mean, we're we're
in like the middle of of Jordan's uh
career at this point." I said, "Jordan,
the guy's a god. It's like, you know, he
the the heavens opened and Jordan came
down to play basketball
and he said, you know, he never had the
money to go to uh to go to a Chicago
Bulls game and that he'll wake up, you
know, in the middle of the night just to
try to get a a Chicago Bulls game on
shortwave radio or whatever it was.
I couldn't get back to the embassy fast
enough
to send a cable to headquarters saying,
"Please, please, please go buy me a
basketball autographed by Michael Jordan
in a in a lucite case."
So they did and then they sent it in the
diplomatic pouch.
So I'm taking the guy to lunch. I'm
taking the guy to dinner. I'm like,
"What do you exactly do at the port?
Like I mean, do you just sit in an
office all day?" He said, "No, I'm the
director of the port, so I, you know,
it's the bills of lading and the
manifests and, you know, sometimes a
ship will come and it it it has a
Filipino flag, but really it's North
Korean." And I'm like, "Yes, yes, this
is exactly what I want."
And we got friendly enough
that I was able to go one Saturday
morning, just drop in on him and say, "I
have a present for you." And I gave him
the basketball.
He couldn't agree to the pitch fast
enough.
I didn't even pay him. It was just the
basketball. He didn't need the money. He
was making plenty of money. And I don't
even remember him being married, so
there was no like vulnerability there.
But basketball,
basketball. I said, "Listen, come to the
United States and I'll introduce you to
Michael Jordan."
Yeah, we can arrange that with two phone
calls.
>> So, okay, you're talking to the guy at
the port before you've before you've
pitched him formally.
>> How often when you target someone and
you start you start working the cycle
with them?
>> Yeah.
>> How often are you asking questions and
probing and getting actionable
intelligence before you actually have to
make the pitch? like do they realize
when they're crossing the line?
>> Yeah. Yeah, that's a good question, too.
It's different with every person,
actually.
You're going to probably have
four, five, six meetings, developmental
meetings, where you're not going to come
out with any intelligence cuz you don't
want to push too hard and and frighten
him away. Um, but then once you get to
the point where
you assume he knows what it is you're
doing, you're going to want to write up
something formally.
When I was in my last tour, I worked
with a woman who went to some of the
best universities in America, and she
was a terrible case officer. She was
just terrible. She just couldn't she
just couldn't, you know, pull the what
do you call this thing on a mo on a lawn
mower? You know, pull the cord. She just
couldn't pull it. It's like, ask the
question.
He's ready to go.
So, the station chief asked me if I
would go with her to her next meeting
because she would come from these
meetings and she'd say, "He just didn't
give me any operational intelligence."
And I said to her, you know, just
between you and me, and I'm telling you
this as a friend, if you carry out an
operational meeting and you don't
collect intelligence, you have failed.
That's a failure.
So either
either
terminate the guy, which just means fire
him and say, "Look, this just isn't
working out. Here's a termination bonus.
It was nice knowing you, and that's the
end of the relationship."
or the problem is yours that you're just
not recognizing what the intelligence
is. So the station chief asked me to go
with her to the next meeting.
And I went and I said, you know, that I
was I was a visiting case officer and
this is my area of expertise and so I
thought I'd ask you a couple of
questions. I got five intelligence
reports out of that meeting. And when we
came out, I said to her, "How many
reports do you think we got in that
meeting?" She said, "None really. There
may have been one." And I said,
"Incorrect.
There are five separate intelligence
reports we got out of that meeting." And
I told her it was this, that, this,
this, and the other one. She's like,
"Man, I just I just don't have an eye
for So I wrote them up and I said,
"Write down everything he says." Even if
you have to go back to the station
directly from the meeting, you know, do
your SDR, of course, but rather than go
home and say, "Ah, I'll write it up
tomorrow morning when I get to the when
I get to the office." Go directly back
to the station while it's still fresh
and write every single word that he
said.
Then you'll be able to do it. So,
you may be able to get actionable
intelligence in your very first
encounter with a guy. That happened to
me a couple of times.
Or it may take a year before he feels
comfortable enough to sort of begin to
open up to you. When people begin to
[__] about their bosses,
>> then you know you're you're headed in
the right direction. Yeah. Yeah. I had
one ambassador. I was at some
international event and he says I think
that my I think that my foreign minister
has lost his mind and I was like tell me
more
and I went straight back to the office
and said the ambassador thinks the
foreign minister has lost his mind.
>> Yeah, you just never know. Let's move
into the MSAD a little bit.
I know that uh you've talked about in in
interviews that uh
you know that the Israelis are ranked
critical threat for counter intelligence
a little bit about our relationship with
them. But something that I'm really
interested in is the MSAD operationally
because I think again correct me if I'm
wrong but it seems like you'd be
hardressed to argue with the fact that
they are really really good
>> best in the world.
>> So yeah I guess broad question like what
has been your experience while at the
agency talking to other case officers
working with the Israelis what stands
out? My experience is universally
negative.
Universally negative.
I've never had a positive encounter with
Mossad. I have never met a CIA officer
who has had a positive encounter with
Mossad. Because the MSAD doesn't give
two shits what you think or what you are
trying to focus on in your job. They
care only about Israel. And if that
means shoving their fists up your ass or
trying to recruit you or telling you to
go [__] yourself while they try to
recruit, you know, the guy sitting next
to you or the guy in the defense
contractor's office, they don't care
what you think of them
because for them it's an issue of
survival. They they have nowhere to go
if they if they don't survive. The thing
is they have a real problem balancing
intelligence collection with political
influence.
You know,
over the last couple of weeks, for
example,
uh a myriad of Western countries have
begun recognizing Palestine
diplomatically.
The British, the French, the Irish, the
Spanish, the Canadians, the Australians.
Next week it's going to be the New
Zealanders. If you look at a map now,
the United States is the only Western
country that doesn't recognize
Palestine.
That says a lot. Um, but we've allowed
the Israelis to put us in a in a corner
where we're either with them or we're
against them and there's nothing in
between. And that's just simply not
true.
We should have as our goals
US national interests.
Period.
I don't give a [__] what Israel's
national goals are. My job as a CIA
officer was to protect the United States
and American interests and American
citizens.
If the Israelis need to protect their
people, God bless. That's on the
Israelis.
But never ever should we place ourselves
second to any other country ever under
any circumstances.
You know there's a famous saying that
there's no such thing as permanent
friendships only permanent interests.
And we live that with every country in
the world except Israel.
We always put Israel's interests first.
You know what? How is it on in our
interest to allow a genocide in Gaza,
for example? It's not. If we're this
shining beacon of of hope for human
rights and civil rights and civil
liberties, then let's be the shining
beacon. Let's not pretend that there's
not a genocide taking place in in Gaza.
There is. And this isn't John's
definition of genocide. This is the
United Nations.
So, I appreciate that the Israelis have
a job to do and they believe that it's a
nearly impossible job,
but that's not my problem and it
shouldn't be the problem of the CIA or
the United States government at large.
So, let's go there then. I mean,
why do you think that uh
Netanyahu has asked every president to
bomb Iran?
>> Yeah. and none of them have done it
besides Trump. Why do you think that is?
>> The Israelis always want us to do their
dirty work for them.
Calculating that if we do it,
there probably will not be retaliation.
And if there is retaliation, of course,
it'll be against us. And we're more
equipped to absorb Iranian retaliation
than the Israelis are. But president
after president after president has
said, "No, we're not going to bomb Iran
for you."
Until Donald Trump said, "Yes, we will
bomb Iran for you." So again, here's a
president who wants desperately to win
the Nobel Peace Prize and my god is
doing really well, right? peace between
freaking Cambodia and Thailand, between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of
Congo, between Pakistan and India.
It's I'm flabbergasted at the success
that Donald Trump has had in these hot
spots around the world.
but on Gaza, which is arguably the most
horrific thing happening in the world
right now,
he just conceds to the Israelis.
So
if if you're Donald Trump
and you strongarm the Iranians
into going back to the negotiating t
table on the nuclear program after they
swore they would never do it,
but they did it because you demanded it.
But then you bomb them with the biggest
bomb that humankind has ever seen.
Well, then what's the incentive for them
to do what you want a second time?
Why why would they trust you? They
shouldn't. I wouldn't. I wouldn't trust
you. And that Nobel Peace Prize, forget
it because we're going to we're going to
head into a longer term war now. Uh Tita
Parsey published a piece uh we're in
we're in early August. He just published
a piece on the 10th of August um
predicting that there would be an
Israeli Iranian war by the end of
August. Trari is one of the greatest
Iran scholars on the planet. And he lays
this out. It's in it's in Foreign
Affairs magazine. He lays it out in very
logical fashion. And so if if the United
States can't be an honest broker and
can't get the two sides apart while the
diplomats do the job that they're
trained to do, then why would they
listen to us on any issue? It doesn't
make sense.
So that's something that I think about.
I agree with you. I don't I don't want
America to be the world police. No,
>> I don't. nor do I
>> I don't really care if there's something
perceived to be wrong with saying I care
about America over any other country's
interests.
>> Where I do wonder and have I guess
wishful thinking is it's easy for people
to, you know, people that don't have
access to classified information to sit
there and Monday morning quarterback it
and say, "Oh my god, you guys armed the
mujaheden when the Soviets were in
Afghanistan. Look what you did." Mhm.
>> But there's obviously more moving pieces
and back doors and there's there's
intelligence that the average American
who reads a newspaper isn't privy to.
>> So I would like to think that
for example Donald Trump
being a certain way to the Israelis is
for a reason. But what reason?
>> The reason is Apac has him by the balls.
I hate to say it. Trump.
>> Yeah.
And not just Trump, but pretty much
every member of Congress. Ape is the
American Israel uh public affairs
committee. It's the Israel lobby. Now,
they somehow have convinced the
government that they are just a group of
Americans who really loves Israel, which
of course is utter complete total
horshit. Uh it's a it should be
registered as a foreign lobbying group,
and it's not. But if you are an elected
official in the United States and you
are not 100% pro-Israel, they will
primary you and they have great success
in defeating incumbents who express even
the vaguest support for Palestinian
human rights.
Um, I'll tell you another thing the
Israelis are successful at is
cultivating Jewish leaders here in the
United States. Josh Shapiro, for
example, I'm from Pennsylvania. Josh
Shapiro is the governor of Pennsylvania.
He happens to be Jewish. Cool. No
problem with that. But he also happens
to be a veteran of the IDF, the Israel
Defense Force. He went and did his um
time on an Israeli kabutz when he was 18
years old. And he loved loved loved
Israel so much that he joined the
Israeli military.
Okay. Now, you're the governor of
Pennsylvania and you're one of the front
runners for the Democratic nomination
for president. But where do your
loyalties lie? You have served the
Israeli government.
I can't trust you to keep the United
States first. In your mind, you haven't
served the American government, but you
serve the Israeli government. That
bothers me immensely.
There were a couple of uh Congress
people who were members of the so-called
squad who gave speeches on the floor of
the House that you know this wholesale
massacre of Palestinian civilians and
women and children, it's just wrong.
They were immediately primar. Cory Bush,
for example, in St. Louis, they threw
her out on her ass. Uh
Jamal Bowman in uh New York out.
Why? Because they said, you know, maybe
the Israelis shouldn't be massacring all
these women and children. Oh, how dare
you. You must be anti-Semitic
and they throw them out. This is a very
dangerous development for a for a a
foreign organization or an organization
that supports a foreign government to
have this kind of strangle hold on our
government.
So, I mean, somebody's got to say
something. Somebody's got to stand up to
these people.
And I think we're getting there. You
know, the rest of the world sees it and
they're all they're all recognizing
Palestine, if only to put diplomatic
pressure on the Israelis. And we're just
not there yet. And and we're standing
alone. You know, we used to have this
joke at the agency.
Every time there was a a vote in the
United Nations uh General Assembly, the
vote was like 194 to four, right? Uh and
the four was always the US, Israel,
uh Costa Rica, and Tuvalu,
right? And then the whole world, the
rest of the world was on the other side.
Why Why do we isolate ourselves like
that? Why do we have to protect the
Israelis and pretend that they're not
committing war crimes or crimes against
humanity? What's in it for us? Remember,
there are no permanent relations, just
permanent interests, and it's not in our
interest to isolate ourselves.
Yeah, man. I uh I haven't touched the
what's going on in Gaza on this show yet
just because I'm not I don't I don't
know if I'm educated enough to give an
opinion on it on camera. But what I will
say I'm educated enough to say is
it'sing horrific.
>> It is.
>> Gaza's leveled. There's there's
thousands of innocent people dying and
starving and it'sing terrible. And I'm
not
>> and we don't know how many bodies are in
the rubble yet. So, the official death
toll is is approaching 70,000,
but but people are afraid that there are
many as or as many as 200,000 bodies
still in the rubble that haven't been
accounted for. And let me add one other
thing again back going back to Pierce
Morgan. Pierce Morgan is an avowed
Zionist, right? That's cool. That's your
position. God bless. Um
but he asked a couple of weeks ago, it
was four of us on the panel, Jack Pobiac
and and two um progressive uh
podcasters,
and he asked uh
he asked
what our positions were on Gaza. And um
I was the last one to speak, but all
three other guys said, "The Israelis
have gone too far." And Pierce says,
"John, what about you? you haven't
really said anything about Gaza. Do you
believe Hamas is a terrorist group and
do you believe Israel has the right to
exist? I said, "Of course I believe
Israel has the right to exist and yes
indeed Hamas is a terrorist group, but
that doesn't mean that the Israeli
government can massacre wholesale women,
children, the elderly. There used to be
seven functioning hospitals in Gaza. Now
there are none. Before the war started,
Gaza had 5 hours of electricity and 2
hours of clean water every day. Now
there is nothing. People are starving to
death in Gaza with more frequency than
they're starving to death in Ethiopia
and we're allowing this to happen.
Enough is enough. I said, "Sure, Israel
has a right to exist, but the Israelis
have to stop murdering people." And then
he said, "This is the first time we've
ever talked about Israel on this show
where all four guests have agreed."
So they've lost us, the Israelis.
They've lost public opinion. They've got
to stop.
And I'll tell you what I'm thinking
about. So I had a uh I had a guy in here
who was a Delta Force operator and he
was he was an officer. So he was a
tactician and you know, not necessarily
a door kicker the entire time, but he
planned operations.
And what he talked about in here was
they have a matrix or a calculus so to
speak about the acceptable number of
civilian casualties when they drop a
building or hit it with a drone.
>> Mh.
>> And I guess again that what prompted me
thinking about that is seeing entire
buildings drop in Gaza to hit one
person.
>> That's the Israeli policy.
They did it in Iran, too, when they
during the 12-day war. They will take
out the entire city block if there's one
target in one of those apartment
buildings that they want to get.
>> So, what about the CIA? Do they have um
like when they plan a drone strike, is
there an acceptable number? It does it
depend on who the target is?
>> It does depend on who the target is. Um
but but the standing orders are the
fewest civilian casualties as humanly
possible. That could mean a lot of
different things. Of course.
>> Yeah. In some cases, you you take out an
entire family of a dozen people if if
you think your target is there and this
is your only opportunity to get him. But
um but for there to be a half a dozen
people killed in a in a drone attack,
that's unusual.
>> A half a dozen is unusual.
>> Yeah. You know what the what the agency
normally likes to do if it has the
opportunity is a a close-in hit. They'll
parachute guys in and they do the hit
and then xfill as quickly as possible.
The Israelis that they don't give a [__]
that they'll literally take out the
entire block. You know, the Israelis,
this was covered in the Washington Post
um uh just a couple days after the
12-day war started. And what the
Israelis did is that they have a lot of
Farsy speaking Jews in Israel. These are
Iranians who are Jewish and who
immigrated to Israel and a lot of them
work from Wasad in Shinbet.
And what the Israelis did was they got
the cell phone numbers of literally
every uh Iranian nuclear scientist. And
they had these Israeli Jews, I'm sorry,
these Iranian Jews call on their cell
phones, call the scientists and say,
"Listen, you're going to die tomorrow,
right? We're going to kill you tomorrow.
You have no hope. You're going to die.
Just ac accept it. Or you can defect to
us right now."
And they're like, "Ah, [__] you." and
they hang up the phone. Then they call
the wives and say, "Listen, we're going
to kill your husband tomorrow. So tell
them this is his only chance. He's going
to die tomorrow." And what they ended up
doing is just taking out the entire the
entire block of apartment buildings.
They killed 14 nuclear scientists. That
devastates the entire program
and um
and uh and family members as well. They
wiped out entire families. And now
they're gathering intelligence on the
next generation of Israeli scientists
and they're going to start killing them.
The the US would never have a policy
like that. We'll try to do, you know,
some pin prick thing or or, you know, do
it in person, but never just, you know,
kill. They killed 300 people in in um
southern Lebanon when they went after
Hassan Nalla, the former head of uh
Hezbollah, just blew up the entire
complex.
It decapitated Hezbala.
It was also a war crime.
I mean to be fair, the MSAD does do the
close-in stuff too.
>> Yeah, they do.
>> Um like the like the Michelle one in
Jordan. And then what about that one uh
in Dubai? Do you remember that?
>> Classic. You know, we studied that for a
long time.
They killed a guy
in a hotel room in Dubai and then after
they killed him, they were somehow able
to lock the door from the inside of the
hotel room.
And we tried like magnets and different
ways. We couldn't figure out how they
did it.
>> Like a latched door.
>> It was they did the latch and the this
one
>> and the guy's in there dead and the
hotel couldn't even get it open. Yeah.
They ended up sending somebody in from
the balcony. And how do they do that?
It's very impressive.
Wasn't there also something? Okay, first
of all, the Israelis never officially
claimed responsibility for that.
>> Mhm.
>> But there was um there was like 26
people that the Dubai CCTV footage
picked up.
>> Right.
>> And Right. And and in Dubai, they have
the most CCTV coverage in the world,
more than the Chinese.
>> But none of them were picked up.
>> No.
>> And number one, people speculate
disguises, but I also I don't know if
this is true, but weren't the cameras
Israeli made?
>> Oh, I wouldn't be surprised. When I was
in Dubai, I got a tour of the whole
facility, and the cameras were German.
>> What facility?
>> There's an underground
[Music]
They have this very sophisticated.
Maybe we should clip that. Are you sure?
I'd like to keep it in.
>> Okay. Okay. I'm going to be serious.
There's an underground facility
that the government of Dubai has
that completely created by Seammens, the
big German company. It's like walking
into an IMAX theater, but instead of one
fivetory
uh screen, it's five stories of TV
monitors. So, you have hundreds of TV
monitors that cover every inch of Dubai.
Every inch. So, we're watching these.
They gave us a tour. We're watching
these and we see um a taxi driver
looking at his phone while he's driving
and he crashes into a telephone pole and
they were like, "Uh, there's a taxi
accident at the intersection of this and
that and the taxi driver's rattled and
he gets out of the out of the cab and
he's trying to gain his, you know,
composure and somebody runs up to him
and we're watching all this on the
screen. somebody runs up to him and then
they call, you know, I think it's 115 is
their version of of 911 and um well, the
ambulance is already on the way because
we we watched it happen in real time. So
the operator is like, "Yes, yes, the
ambulance is on the way. The whole
country is covered." Now, you can't do
that in a country like the United
States, but you can do it in other
places and then you can intercept what's
happening in those other places. Was
that while you were in?
>> No, I was on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee then. And it's
funny. I was talking I I went to Dubai
to talk about halalas. You know what a
halala is?
>> Isn't that the the money transfer thing?
Yeah. Explain to people.
>> Yeah. So, one of the way that one of the
ways that terrorist groups launder money
is through something called a hala.
And it's a it's a time-tested, you know,
old school way to transfer money. And so
what you do is you go in to see, you
know, Omar the tent maker and you say to
Omar, "Hey, listen. I want to transfer
uh $50 to my my friend Mahmood in
Cairo." And uh you give him $55.
He sends an email to some guy in Cairo
and
they generate a 16-digit number and
they'll say, you know, Mahmood's going
to come in and when he comes in, give
him his $50 and then Omar the tent maker
and Mahmood split the $5 fee. So, it's
untraceable, utterly untraceable,
and it happens every day all across the
Middle East and parts of Africa.
So I went to see the chief of police of
D of Dubai and I said how do you how do
you follow what's happening here and I
they they follow it. So just to just to
test it um I sent myself 50 bucks. I
said uh I want to send something to um
to myself. I live in Washington DC. They
said okay uh it'll be $55. Gave them the
55. They gave me 16-digit number and
they told me to go to this Arabic uh
bakery in Bethesda, Maryland. So, I flew
home a few days later. I take the subway
up to Bethesda. I went in with my
16-digit number. The guy looks in his
little ledger that he has and he gives
me my $50.
No record. There's no trace of it.
Completely
anonymous.
You don't have to show any ID or
anything. So, that's how they transfer
drug money. That's how terrorist groups
finance themselves.
But the Dubian
have a have a beat on it.
>> So that's you were there to educate them
on that.
>> No, I was there to ask them how the heck
do you do this?
>> Oh,
>> yeah. And they were like, well,
there are a lot of threats that take
place at the same time. Yeah. Like we
can beat you on the soles of your feet
with a baseball bat
or you can give us copies of your ledger
every day at the end of the workday.
The Middle East. Your choice. Your
choice. That's right.
So the U had the US sorted out the Hala
problem at this time because I would
assume that terrorists were using it in
the US
>> and they continue to use it. The the US
hoalas are easy enough to infiltrate.
Um, any FBI agent can go to this Arabic
bakery and and they probably already
have gone to the Arabic bakery in
Bethesda, Maryland, and said, "Look, you
know, we're going to [__] you up or
you're going to give us access to your
books." It's the US government is far
more worried about uh cryptocurrency.
>> Yeah. That's why, you know, doing my
taxes this most recent uh iteration,
they asked me, Quicken asked me three
different times if I had bought or sold
crypto. Like how many? Why three times?
It's because they're so worried about
terrorist financing and money
laundering. Like, have you bought or
sold crypto? Are you sure you haven't
bought or sold crypto? Maybe you forgot.
You want to think about it a minute?
Have you bought or sold crypto? I'm
like, no, I don't have any crypto.
But they're very worried about it. Well,
what I was going to ask is because the
way the way the blockchain and I don't
know much about it, but the way it's
written, so to speak, they don't they
don't have any ends. They don't
legitimately they do not have any ends.
No. And that's why the likes of Coinbase
just open their books to the to the
government because they don't want to be
implicated in terrorist financing and
money laundering.
>> Mhm.
So, um, to come back to the MSAD,
>> I told this for for people that listen
to the I had a historian, Rick Rick
Spence. He's a Oh, you know Rick?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Um, so for people that heard me tell the
story on that podcast, sorry about that,
but I want to get John's take on it and
you'll hear why.
>> So, um, there was a
this was a a documentary that was that
came out of Israel. So, it was all on
the up and up. And there was a MSAD
officer that told a story about um they
recruited an asset who let's say he was
like some sort of you know goat herder
or something in I believe let's I think
it was Syria and so they recruit the guy
and eventually the Palestinians come to
the guy and they wanted to recruit him
because his he was in close proximity to
the Israeli border.
>> Sure.
>> Um again I don't know if it was Syria
but whatever let's just say there was.
So the Palestinians come to him and then
he goes and tells uh the MSAD and
they're like, "Hey, I got approached by
these guys. They want to know about some
either border setup or movement of the
IDF." And what the MSAD said is, "Okay,
give them the information because let's
just assume what you can see they can
see and it's all out there. Build a
relationship. Give them the
information." Gives it to him.
>> So then they come back to him and they
say, "Okay, we want you to find a spot
in the border wall for us to cross into
Israel."
>> Oh boy. So he goes to the MSAD and he
tells him this and they say, "Okay,
let's let's go find a spot in the border
wall together and then when they come
through there'll be a warm welcome
waiting for him." So they pick the spot,
he goes and tells the Palestinians and
they say, "Okay, great. Thanks." The
night before the operation, they tell
him, they say, "Oh yeah, and by the way,
as an insurance policy, you're coming
with us."
>> Oh [__] Yeah.
>> So he tells this and they said, "Well,
if you if you say no, they'll get
spooked and they'll either you'll blow
your cover or they'll kill you."
>> Mhm.
>> So go with them and when you cross the
border, hit the deck and we have ways to
make sure that you don't get shot. And
essentially that was all [__] And
the way that the MSAD officer described
it was sacrificing a a pawn off the
chessboard. And so
I don't say that to illustrate the fact
that oh my god the MSAD is so bad. Like
intelligence is is a dirty game. I think
we're all well aware of that. But the
point what I got from that is
>> why the hell would they be saying this?
Number one to to speak to the
ruthlessness of MSAD. Sure. The
mystique. I think that that is
beneficial to an intelligence agency.
But
>> you're a Palestinian.
>> That's what I'm saying. Why would you
want to work with any agency?
>> Volunteer. Yeah.
>> Do they burn assets like that? Oh, I'm
sure that they do. I'm sure that they
do. But I'll tell you, no no no other no
other intelligence service would would
send somebody send a recruited asset to
his death like that. That doesn't make
any sense. But the Israelis are not like
anybody else.
They're not. It's just another
Palestinian
to them.
>> So, what's an example operationally like
that that you can think of when you're
like, the Israelis are different?
you know, almost everything that the
Israelis do. When I was the first time I
went on Pierce Morgan, I debated a
former director of the Mossad
and the guy just couldn't stop chuckling
all through the I mean, it was
ridiculous.
I said things like the Israeli spy on
the United States.
Oh, no. No, not since Jonathan Pard. And
I said, well, Jonathan Pard was caught
in 1985 and you were spying on the
United States in 1998,
you know, or 2004.
No comment. It's like, what what is
that? We would never we're not permitted
to spy on the Israelis. We're not
permitted. The the potential for
blowback is is outrageous. Can you
imagine if we spied on the Israelis and
got caught? Every member of Congress
would be demanding the CIA director's
head.
>> Do you think that we really don't spy on
the Israelis?
>> That was verboten when I was there.
>> I was surprised to hear you say that in
that interview because I figured it's
this gentleman's game, so to speak.
Mm-m.
With most other places post 911, you
know, we develop the five eyes and we
don't spy on each other in the five
eyes. Uh the five eyes being US, UK,
Canada, Australia, New Zealand. You
know, we literally sit next to each
other in each other's headquarters. I
remember when George Tennant ordered us
to open the files, he said, and he meant
literally open the files. And so, we've
had this Five Eyes relationship ever
since. And of course, we have very, very
close relationships with other
countries. Not a ton, but a lot. But the
Israelis are special. Yeah. We do not
spy on the Israelis.
What about the Brits? Like I don't know
why do they have a reputation of being
I don't want to not ruthless
necessarily, but what what was your
experience with the Brits?
>> The the Brits are very good at what they
do. And the one of the reasons why
they're very good, well, there are
several reasons. One, because they're
everywhere, right? Most of these
countries were colonies of the UK at one
time or another, but they're also very
good because they have only a fraction
of the bureaucracy that we do. If we
have an idea for an operation or for a
covert action program, we have to go
through six months and a dozen layers of
permissions, you know, lawyers from this
office and lawyers from that office. The
Brits want to do something. and they
just say, "Hey, we're going to do this."
And then they go out and do it. I
remember a boss of mine in in
counterterrorism just
saying I I was on my way out to London.
We were doing a joint operation and he
said, "Boy, I I wish we were like the
Brits. If they want to do something a
week later, they're doing it." And I
mentioned that to the Brits one time and
my counterpart said, "Yeah, but we wish
we had your budget."
>> And I said, "Yeah, you guys can never
touch our budget. Nobody can.
>> Um,
this is completely unrelated, but I
don't know why I thought of this. Didn't
you do an op uh with Billy Wall?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In the Emirates.
>> Can you say what that was?
>> I cannot unfortunately. It was
It was We did two things. We were there
to do some training classes, but we were
there for a sensitive electronic kind of
thing, but Billy was
Billy was a bonafide American hero.
Truly
a real hero. Yeah. I mean, for people
aren't that aren't familiar, he was uh
he was former I mean, [__] man. He was
one of the uh the Vietnam SF guys. He
was a Green Beret and then he was he
served at the CIA for like 40 years or
something. Yeah, he was in World War II,
Korea, and Vietnam, and to the best of
my recollection had 17 Purple Hearts. He
had a he had a personalized license
plate that said 17 hits.
And I said, "Billy, that's that's a
joke, right?" And he said, "No, it's not
a joke. I got 17 purple hearts." I said,
"That has to be like Guinness Book of
World Records kind of thing." And he
says, he had a terrible, terrible,
filthy mouth. And he's like, "No,
there's some sorry ass son of a [__]
from North Carolina got 18."
But he used to he used to tell stories,
too. Like he told me this story once
about about being shot down behind North
Korean lines.
And he would forget that he had told me
the story. And so he would tell it over
and over and over. And then the final
time that he that he told me the story,
he was naked. first of all.
Secondly, um he he came upon a cow in a
pasture and he slit the cow's uh artery
and drank the blood um for nourishment
because he was starving. I go, "That was
in Apocalypse Now. That wasn't you. That
was from Apocalypse Now." And he's like,
"Ah, it still makes for a good story."
Oh, that's great. He was a good guy.
>> Was Was he uh Did they even have Ground
Branch back then or was he just a
contractor?
>> Yeah, he was just a contractor.
He was a contractor and he was fearless.
And I mean when I knew him, he was
already well into his 70s
and you know died in his 90s, never had
children. His he was deeply in love with
his wife, but she had died of cancer. So
he was alone. And then 9/11 hit and what
else is there to live for? He's got no
kids. bought a house in
it was like uh yeah, friendly friendly
town or
Sunshineville or it had some stupid
madeup name in Florida.
Um I can't remember the name of it. And
he had a niece who lived in Las Vegas
and she she ghost wrote his
autobiography. And I was glad somebody
did because his stories, whether or not
they were a little embellished, his
stories are an important part of modern
American history and there really needed
to be a written record of them.
>> Yeah. Niceville.
>> Niceville.
>> That's something American.
>> Yeah. Niceville, Florida.
>> Were you at the agency when they stood
up the GRS program?
>> No, I had already gone. I had already
gone, but I was dating a woman at the
time whose soontobe ex-husband was in
GRS. And she said, my husband's a GRS
officer. I said, "What's GRS?"
She looked at me kind of funny and she
told me, and I said, "Oh [__] they've
made it official."
>> So, what was it before they made it
official?
>> It was just like, "Hey, uh, you doing
anything for the next week? We're going
to need for you to do this thing. Don't
tell anybody." Yeah. And now it's an
office.
>> But wasn't it wasn't it stood up to be
like security for case officers?
>> Security for leaders more than case
Well, no, that's not true. Security for
case officers. Yes. Especially as it
related to operating in the green zone
in Baghdad. That That's where most of
them were doing their work cuz the green
zone was easily infiltrated. Yeah.
Moving from point A to point B, it took
your life into your hands every time.
those guys.
I mean, you have to be a brave son of a
gun to to do a job like that. I mean,
you can say about a lot of different
agency jobs, oh, that job's not for
everybody. That job, you really have to
be fearless. You really do. Cuz your
your job is literally to throw your body
in front of the other guy so the other
guy doesn't get killed and can complete
the meeting.
Yeah, thankless.
>> I can't remember who it was. It was
somebody who was in GRS was talking
about Yemen and how Yemen was like a
spycraft playground.
>> Oh my god. I've been to Yemen five times
>> in your prior life.
>> Mhm.
>> In what context?
>> Each time was for a different thing. Um
the first time I went, it was kind of
funny. Um the first time I went, there
were two Yemens, right? There was the
Republic of Yemen, North Yemen, and then
the People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen, which was a Soviet satellite
state. And um things were looking really
good. The first time I went, the two
Yemens were in the process of merging
and becoming one unified Yemen. People
were literally dancing in the streets.
Uh I I went that first time from
Jedha. I was I was in Jedha, Saudi
Arabia. and uh two friends of mine were
stationed in in Sana. And so they said,
"Hey, you know, the prophet's birthday
is Monday, so it's a 3-day weekend. You
want to come down to to Yemen? We'll
hang out." And I said, "Yeah, I'd never
been to Yemen." So I just flew down. We
had a great time.
Second time I went, this one unified
Yemen thing, it's not working out the
way they thought it was. And so
there weren't really any benefits. And
the North Yemenes were trying to
dominate the South Yemenes. and it just
wasn't good. The third time I went,
they're launching Scud missiles at each
other, right? And then it was the first
civil war and then the North defeated
the south and then the vice president um
Ali Albid uh he was a South Yemen, he
fled to or fled to Oman to save himself.
And the fourth time I went,
it was it was grim
where it wasn't safe to stay anywhere
except the Marriott, which had 30 foot
blast walls all around it. The last time
I went, I was with the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, and
we were just getting ready to close the
embassy and evacuate everybody. So, I go
there. I'm staying at the Marriott and
security is crazy heavy. It's actually
kind of funny. I I alluded to this in a
Senate report that I wrote. Um, but I
had never seen security like this
anywhere.
And
there are these guys right outside the
lobby of the hotel and they've got
machine guns like obviously like you
know Mac 9ines, Mac 10s and they're
speaking English, American English.
And
I said to the to the bobb, the the
doorman,
I said, "Uh, mana, who who's here?" And
he goes, "VIP."
Like that. I said, "VIP? Who? Mrs.
Clinton?" He goes, "No, it's a man." I
said, "Uh,
is it uh Mr. Cheney?" Or, "No, it wasn't
Cheney. It was Biden was vice president
at the time."
uh Biden. And he says, "No." I said,
"Who is it?" He goes, "I don't know." So
then I hear um the package is moving.
The package is moving. So I'm just
standing there and then here comes the
VV VIP and he looks at me and he goes,
"Hello, John." And I said, "Hello, Steve
Kappus, the deputy director of the CIA."
>> And he gets in his limo and I go, "What?
No ride for me?"
and he drives away like a sixcar convoy.
I had to wait for my, you know,
one poorly armored 10-year-old
Volkswagen to come and pick me up. It
was so rude. Anyway, I was on the CIA
[__] list by then.
>> Yeah. So,
um, the reason why it was so bad, just a
couple of days before I arrived, a group
of, well, about a week before I arrived,
a group of of six South Korean diplomats
had arrived to talk to the Yemen
government about a development project.
And on the road from the airport to the
hotel, they were ambushed by al-Qaeda.
And they were all assassinated.
And so a few days after that, the South
Korean government sent a group of South
Korean intelligence officers to
investigate the terrorist attack and
they were ambushed on the road to the
hotel and they were all assassinated.
The Koreans just shut the embassy down
and evacuated everybody.
It's it's grim. It really is. And
there's no hope in sight.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I remember hearing about
there was a I mean obviously a lot of
terror going on in Yemen, but wasn't
there um I want to say it was some I
think it was the Saudi intelligence head
that almost got killed by the guy with
the bomb up his ass.
>> Yeah, that was uh the sha that was
Prince Muhammad bin Naif.
>> But wasn't that directed by uh the
American guy in Yemen alli or whatever
the hell his name was?
>> That was the rumor. I never believed
that to be the case because Olaki was
more of a propagandist than he wasn't
operational in any way. You know, I met
him.
Yeah. In fact, I was the only
CIA officer. Well, here here's what
happened. I'm in Arabic training in 1993
and our in the CIA language school and
the the instructor says we're going to
go out on a field trip today. We're
going to go to Falls Church, Virginia
and that's where all the Arabs live. So,
we're going to go to um the Quran store.
There's a there's a store in the strip
mall in false church that just sells
Qurans. And apparently they do perfectly
fine for themselves. So, we're going to
go to the Quran store. Then, we're going
to go to the Arabic grocery store, and
then we're going to go to the shish
kebab restaurant, but you can't speak
English. And then after lunch, we're
going to go to the mosque. There's a
gigantic mosque on uh Route 7 in false
church. We're going to go to the mosque
and we're going to talk about Islam, but
you can't speak English.
We're like, cool. And we had done this a
couple times. We went to the zoo to
learn the names of the animals in
English. And then we had, you know, we
did all different kinds of field trips.
So we go go do this thing and we learn
the the word for, you know, fava beans
and we learn the word for newspaper and
we're trying to talk to the shopkeepers.
We order lunch in Arabic and then we go
to the the mosque. Well, Anoir Alaki was
the imam of the mosque.
And
8 years later,
that's where the 9/11 hijackers prayed
the night before 9/11.
Anoir Olaki was born in um New Mexico.
He was Yemen. His father was the Yemeni
ambassador to the United States who went
back to Yemen to become the Minister of
Agriculture.
Solidly pro-American.
Anoir was born in New Mexico, raised as
an American, spoke English without any
kind of accent, just spoke English like
you and I speak English, but
self-radicalized
during the Soviet occupation of
Afghanistan and then joined al-Qaeda
before 9/11 in like 98 or 99.
So
after 9/11, I just I mentioned
off-handedly one day.
Oh, Alaki, I met him. People were like,
"What?" I said, "Yeah, in in my Arabic
class, we went to the mosque and he gave
us a tour of the mosque and we had a Q&A
and then he gave us tea and next thing I
know, security's down. It's like, we
need to go over this from the beginning
because everybody else had left the
agency by then. All the other students
had moved on to other careers and the
the instructor had retired and I was the
only one left who had actually met
Alaki. I'm like guys it was one
afternoon. I don't know what I can tell
you that's going to be of any
operational value. But then I did go to
Yemen and um funny thing you know I have
this relationship with the FBI right? So
I go I go to Yemen and nobody in the CIA
would speak to me. I was with the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.
So I go to see the FBI, the legal the
legal attaches. So I walk in and I I
knock on the door and I said, "Hey." And
the guy says, "Ah, John Kiryaku, born
August 9th, 1964, Sharon, Pennsylvania.
Graduated from Newcastle High School,
Newcastle, Pennsylvania. bachelor's
degree in Middle Eastern Studies,
Masters in Legislative Affairs from
George Washington University. I go,
"Very funny. Very funny." He says,
"You're going to do me a favor." And I
said, "Really? What favor is that?"
He said, "You're going to go back to
your congressional committee and you're
going to get me funding for two more
slots out here." And I said, "Really?
What's in it for me?" He says, "I'll
give you a classified briefing."
I said, 'Okay, I'll take that deal. So,
I I did get him slots for two more FBI
agents, but in the course of that
conversation, I said, "So, what do you
do? Sit here and play with your balls or
you out looking for Anoir Alaki?" And he
said, "Alacki? I know when Alaki blows a
fart." He says, he said, "I know Alaki's
location to within three feet 24 hours a
day.
And I said, 'Why don't you take him
out?' He said, 'Well, that's
that's the other side of the hall's job.
And then sure enough, couple months
later, they blow him to a thousand
pieces.
Uh,
what was classified briefing on?
>> How lackey.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Yeah,
>> I don't know. Uh well actually speaking
of uh like the Saudis, uh didn't we
didn't cover this last time, but didn't
Abu Zaba's diary have the names and
phone numbers of three of them?
>> Three princes.
>> But then something weird happened to
them.
>> We went to the Saudis and we said,
"Look, there are there are three princes
in Abu Zabeta's address book with their
personal cell phone numbers.
You need to take care of this or we're
going to take care of it and you're not
going to like the way we do it. Next
thing you know, like magic,
one of them dies on the operating table
while getting beriatric bypass surgery.
One is killed in a onecar accident on
the Riad to Jedha Highway. And one of
them goes camping in the desert and dies
of thirst.
Mhm. And then they said, "Listen, you
know, we wanted to help you out with
those three princes, but they they don't
exist anymore."
>> So, are the Saudis friends?
>> In that context, I would argue that they
weren't because that means that none of
those guys are available for
interrogation. Ah,
it was better to murder their own
relatives
than to allow them to be interrogated by
the CIA.
>> Probably because they had information up
there that the Saudis didn't want the
CIA to find out.
>> Mhm.
I've been in relatively close touch
recently with Abu Zuba's attorneys.
Um, I asked one if he would agree to sit
for my podcast and he immediately said
yes. So, we had a long conversation
about Abu Zuba.
And at the end of it, we had stopped
recording and I said, "Would you do me a
favor? Would you tell Abu Zuba?" They
don't call him Abu Zuba. They call him
Zay. Zay Alabadin Muhammad Hussein is
his actual name. I just by force of
habit, I call him Abu Zuba. So I said,
"Would you tell him that I send my best?
I'm sorry for what our country did to
him. I know that he's innocent and that
he should be released and I hope he is
someday." And the attorney says,
"Actually, he has a message for you. I
told him I was going to talk to you
today."
He goes, he says, "First, his
recollection of the night you caught him
is different from yours."
I said undoubtedly it is different.
Um but that's okay. His recollection is
probably I stood up and I told them, you
know. Anyway, um he says, uh the night
that you blew the whistle on the torture
program, a friendly guard at Guantanamo
went to his cell and said a CIA man went
public today about what happened to you.
And he said it was the first time he had
experienced a sensation of hope. That
was December 2007. And he says he wanted
me to tell you he hopes that the two of
you can have dinner someday as free men.
I said, "Tell him I send my best and
I'll pray for that."
>> Wouldn't hold my breath on that one.
>> No. You know, one of the sad things
about that as a postcript is he was
weeks from being released at the end of
the Biden administration. They had they
had made the decision to release him.
They were in negotiations with different
countries to take him. They couldn't
find a country that would agree to take
him.
And then Trump won. And so he's not
going anywhere.
>> All right. So
did uh so I'll just I'll made some notes
uh throughout that we can come back to.
So, um
I forget what it was when did they ever
teach you? Oh, right. Worst case, uh as
a CIA officer, right, you pitch a you
pitch an agent, he flips a table over
and says I'm going to report you. Other
worst case is, you know, you're
operating abroad. You are brought in by
the authorities of that country or, you
know, god forbid, a terrorist
organization or something. Did they
teach you guys um counter interrogation
or SEIR? not sear but counter
interrogation techniques. Yeah. And we
even have coffee mugs with uh admit
nothing, deny everything, make counter
accusations. Uh if you're if you're
overseas and you're under official
cover, all you have to say is look,
diplomatic immunity, call the American
embassy. That's it. Done. I'm not saying
another word. Call the American Embassy.
If you're kidnapped by a terrorist
organization, that's an entirely
different issue. You know, Bill Buckley,
the CIA learned so many lessons,
painful, terrible lessons with the
kidnapping of Bill Buckley in 1984. Bill
Buckley was the uh CIA station chief in
Beirut and was was kidnapped by um
elements of Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
They kidnapped him in the parking garage
of his apartment building. And um
they knew that he had a tracker, a
tracking device in his belt buckle. So
the first thing they did is they just
took the belt off of him and threw it
out the car window. And so we didn't
have any idea where he was. About a
month later, the American embassy in
Athens receives a VHS tape showing
Buckley being tortured and he's begging
the agency to help him. And then um
another like six months pass or 4
months, whatever it is, it's out there
uh in in the media. Uh the American
embassy in Rome receives a videotape and
he's like just hanging from a hook and
there's snot coming out of his mouth and
he's mumbling something that you can't
understand. And then we had a source
tell us that they just executed him
after a while. And um we were able to
get his body back. And then the people
who kidnapped him from from Pidge, the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
no longer exist.
So we took care of them and then got the
body back. And he's buried at Arlington
Cemetery. Now I go every once in a
while. I live walking distance from
Arlington Cemetery. So I go see the CIA
station chief from Athens and go see
Buckley and um Mike Span and people like
that. So uh we learned a lot of lessons
there.
>> Yeah.
>> Did you know Mike Span?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> Wasn't he one of the Ground Branch guys
that was uh immediately in in Jawbreaker
on the ground?
>> Yeah.
We we worked 10 feet away from each
other. We were in the same that bullpen
area. Yeah. Good guy. Nice guy. Good
family man. Yeah.
Looking back at what happened to him,
I can only imagine the panic that must
have set in. He was at Lashkar. Uh I'm
sorry. Um he was at uh
oh [__] I forget the name of the fort
in northern Afghanistan.
We had just caught um John Walker Lind,
the American Talib, and uh
the name's going to come to me. And
there was an uprising among all these
Taliban and al-Qaeda prisoners we had
caught. And Mike and a couple of other
guys were were soon overwhelmed. They
ended up just opening fire on these guys
and they ran out of bullets. And then he
was stomped to death. That's how he
died. They stomped him to death. Mhm.
>> Like deliberately by
>> Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah.
I can only imagine
the panic.
What was the name of that fort?
I I can't remember anymore. But he he
died a hero's death,
>> man. The absolute balls on those guys.
>> Mhm.
>> And that was what before the end of
September, right? Or the very beginning
of October. the very beginning I think
of October.
No, that's not right because the
uprising
was to the best of my recollection on
the
on the 30th of November maybe.
I think it was the 30th of November
2001.
Yeah.
And so, um, again, another thing we
didn't talk about is, uh, your we didn't
really get into your time with with
Carrie, but I think there was one funny
story that you didn't tell here that
involved the CIA and well, funny is
maybe the wrong word choice, but the
with the whole Dashi thing.
Dash dele. Yeah. So
on November 30th and December 1st of
2001,
2,000 Taliban soldiers gave up on Mas to
the Northern Alliance at Dashleia in
northern Afghanistan.
And the Northern Alliance came to us and
said, "We can't hold 2,000 prisoners.
What should we do?"
And we told them to put them in trucks,
truck them out into the desert, and
let's just hold them there out in the
desert until we can divide them up and
send them to jails around the country.
So, General Abdul Rashid Dostam, who's
like the greatest traitor in the history
of of Afghanistan, he's he's with the
Northern Alliance, then he's with the
Taliban, then he's with the Northern
Alliance again, he's with the Taliban
again, and he's just a just a traitor of
the of the worst ilk. And um
he was in charge of these prisoners.
So
they trucked these 2,000 people
jammed into containers out into the
desert.
And one of the 16 survivors
told us that when they opened the
trucks, the bodies fell out like
sardines from a can because nobody had
punched air holes in the trucks and
there was no food or water. And so
almost all 2,000 of them suffocated.
We always believed Dostam did it on
purpose
because he was that kind of a
psychopath.
So
Barack Obama promised during the 2008
campaign to investigate the what's
what's now called the dashle massacre.
And he said, you know, if I'm elected
president, I'm going to order the
National Security Council to begin this
investigation. Blah blah blah. never
happened because the agency got to him
right away. Anyway, in 2009, I find
myself as the senior investigator on the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and a
human rights activist, quite a
prominent, important, well-known human
rights activist, calls me and says he
needs to see me privately, like
secretly. So, we meet in a darkened,
unused classroom at John's Hopkins
University.
I go, I say, "What's up?" And he says,
'You know the Dash Ley massacre? I said,
'Of course. He said, I've got a a
witness who has just come forward. He
was 12 at the time, but he was behind a
rock when they were opening the trucks.
We used to call it the box up. So, he he
had witnessed the sort of unveiling of
the of the containers.
And there were two guys there wearing
blue jeans and black shirts and speaking
English.
And I said, "Well, I mean, who's in
dashi, Afghanistan
on December the 1st, 2001, wearing a
black t-shirt and blue jeans and
speaking English?"
So this kid had become an American
citizen. He had held this inside all
these years. approached him and said,
"Look, I don't know if this is
important, but this is what I saw."
So,
I went to Carrie and I said
I met with this human rights activist
whom he knew and uh I said, "You know,
the president did say he was going to
reopen the case and get to the bottom of
Dashley." Carrie says, "Okay, write a
letter to the agency. Ask if there were
agency personnel on the ground." So I
write a letter and uh we autopen it you
know John Kerry chairman
like six weeks pass
and a colleague of mine walks in and he
says hey uh you got a response from the
agency to your letter. I said I just
checked my mail an hour ago. I didn't
see any response from the agency. He
said they classified it top secret so
it's downstairs in the vault. And at the
time I only had a secret clearance. I
said well what did it say? and he said
uh says go [__] yourself. I was like oh
okay. So that's how they want to play
it. So I was going to go guns blazing,
right? Call the Washington Post, tell
the story. And then Carrie calls me.
He's like, "Stop.
Stop." I said, "Come on now." I said,
"The president specifically said he
wanted us to get to the bottom of
dashy." And Carrie says, "Yeah." And now
he doesn't.
>> So, did the agency know that it was you
on his staff?
>> Absolutely.
100% yes.
>> Go [__] yourself. It's like, "All right.
All right.
I can call the post, too."
[Music]
>> Yeah. Um, anything else stand out from
your time with Kerry that you don't
typically talk about?
>> I was so excited to work for John Kerry
and he turned out to be a coward. Just a
mainstream nobody. All he ever talked
about was how desperately he wanted to
be Secretary of State and how he got
ripped off and Hillary Clinton stole his
job from him. There were only two times
when I ever gave John Ky unsolicited
advice.
once.
It's a little bit of a story. We have
time,
>> of course. Yeah.
>> So, he asked me to write him a speech.
He had a speech writer, but on stuff
that was like really specific to the
Middle East, I did it. So, he's going to
give a speech at
like the Smithsonian Institution or
Council on Foreign Relations, something.
I I don't remember anymore. This is
2009.
Let me back up actually.
So in in 2008 I had my own little
business and M. McCclardy who had been
Bill Clinton's chief of staff at the
White House. Mack very generously
offered me an office and a part-time
secretary in McClardy Associates. Back
then it was Kissinger McCclardy.
I I was very I was very indebted to him.
He was very kind to me.
So, one of the guys on the board of
directors of McCclardy was Governor Bill
Richardson, Congressman Bill Richardson,
Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson,
Ambassador of the United Nations Bill
Richardson. And Bill and I loved each
other.
I even voted for him for president in
2008 after he quit the race. And I told
him, "Bill, I still voted for you."
Anyway, anyway, um we really got along
and so
he he comes into my office. Let me think
of the date. It was like
January of 2008. January December 2007,
something like that.
And he says to me, it was J. It was No,
it wasn't. It was February of 2008. He
says, "Hey, you have a minute?" I said,
"Of course." He said, "Something crazy
happened over the weekend." He said, "I
invited Obama to my house to watch the
Super Bowl."
Super Bowl is like first Sunday in
February now. And um he said at halftime
we went for a walk, put his arm around
me. And he said, "Bill,
if you can endorse me and you bring the
Hispanic vote,
Secretary of State."
I said, "You going to do it?" He goes,
"Of course I'm going to do it." I said,
"Awesome." He goes, "I want you to be my
deputy chief of staff." I said, "Done.
I'll take it." He his chief of staff
from when he was governor, really sweet
guy. He was going to be chief of staff.
I said, "I'm in. I'll take it."
So, we're the months are passing like,
"Oh my god, I can't believe and Obama's
gonna win and Richardson's going to be
going to be Secretary of State and I'm
going to be ambassador to Greece or, you
know, it's going to be awesome.
November comes, Obama wins."
So, the day after the election, I go
into the office and I said, I go like
this. I go, "Mr. Secretary,
congratulations."
He goes, "Man, I am so excited. I can't
even sleep. I'm so excited." Couple of
weeks later, I'm in the shower and I had
a radio in my in my, you know, bathroom
sitting on the on the sink and I'm
listening to the news station in DC,
WTO, and they said, "Former New Mexico
Governor Bill Richardson uh has been
tapped by President-ele Elect Obama to
be Secretary of Commerce." And I was
like, "What?"
So, I get dressed. I go into the office
and I go, "Mr. Secretary,
congratulations." He goes like this. He
goes, "What the [__] do I know about
commerce? Tell me, what the [__] do I
know about commerce?" And I said, "No,
no, no. We can make something out of
this."
I go, "There's the foreign commercial
service." I said, "There's the
international trade representative. We
can turn this into something. You do it
for the first term and then Secretary of
State in the second term.
He goes, "I'm so mad I could explode."
Couple of more weeks pass. Same thing.
I'm in the shower.
I got the news on and they said, "Former
New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson has
withdrawn his nomination to be Secretary
of Commerce." I was like, "Fuck."
So, I go in the office and he said, "I
just I couldn't do it. I just couldn't
do it." He said, "I honestly have zero
interest in trade. Nothing." I said, 'N
no, that's cool. I'll figure something
out. Then I get hired by Carrie.
So I write this speech with him. One of
the things about Carrie I always hated
is he thinks he's smarter than everybody
else in the room. And so you've got this
very carefully scripted speech for him
to write and he'll just start winging it
and meandering all over the place. And
his sentences have no verbs in them. and
you don't know what the heck he's
talking about or what the point is. And
then he can't remember where he left off
and he's like looking at the different
sheets of paper. I hated would do that.
So I think it was at the Smithsonian we
must have been. And he's reading the
speech. He's giving the speech, you
know, the Middle East and the peace
process and all this stuff. And then he
says, you know,
I was supposed to be the Secretary of
State and I thought, oh no. Oh no. and
he says,"I invited uh President Obama to
my house for Christmas."
So, this is like four, five weeks before
Richardson.
And he said, uh, they're sitting there
having a having a little drink and Obama
says, "John,
if you endorse me and you can bring the
Kennedy family along,
Secretary of State."
So Carrie, nobody remembers this, Carrie
was the first senator to endorse Obama.
And a week later, the whole Kennedy
family endorses Obama. It was a big deal
because Carrie was close to the to the
Clintons and both Carrie and and Hillary
were on the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee together.
And he says, "But uh you know that's
Washington politics. I got screwed." So
afterwards, I said, "Senator, you can't
say in public that you you were supposed
to be Secretary of State." I said, "Bill
Richardson tells exactly the same
story." I said, "Obama promised half a
dozen people in Washington that they
would be Secretary of State. He promised
uh what's his face that that died at the
at the State Department? I forget his
name now. The special negotiator for
Yugoslavia." Anyway, he's promising
everybody they're going to be Secretary
of State.
That was the one time. He goes, "I know.
I'm still bitter. I can't help it." The
other time, I get a call from the
Lebanese ambassador and he's like,
"What's your boss's problem?" I said,
"Well, now what did he do?" He says, "He
gave an interview and he keeps calling
Bashar al-Assad." My dear friend, Bashar
al-Assad.
I said, "Uh, I'll talk to him."
So, I said, "Senator,"
I said, "The Lebanese ambassador called
me and you have to stop calling Bashar
al-Assad my dear friend." And he's like,
"Well, he is my dear friend." And I
said, "Be that as it may,
he's a genocidal maniac who just wipes
out entire swaths of his population."
And he goes, "Well, you know, we rode
motorcycles together down to the Golan
Heights." And and we exchanged, you
know, kind of a a relationship. Uh I
said, "I I I get it. He's probably a
lovely guy, but he's he's a genocidal
dictator." He's like, "All right, all
right. Tell the Lebanese get off my
back."
So, it's like, "Dude,
what are you doing?" Another thing about
Carrie, I I've said this a couple times,
but I think it's important enough to
repeat.
When he first called me to offer me this
job, I didn't know this job existed. So,
he calls me and he says, and I had never
met him, but I was friendly with people
who actually I won't I won't give names,
but I was friendly with two guys that he
served in Vietnam with, and they both
said, "Hey, you should talk to John
Kiryaku." So he called me and he said,
"The Senate Foreign Relations Committee
used to have an investigative function,
but it was it was zeroed out in 1972
and I'm going to bring it back and I
want to do hard-hitting investigations."
And I said, "That sounds like my sweet
spot." So he said, "Why don't you come
up? We'll have a chat. We can see if
we're a fit for one another." I said,
"Great." I put on a suit. I go up to his
office.
You walk into his office. He was in the
uh the Russell Senate office building,
the historic office building with the
15t ceilings.
Literally from the floor to the ceiling
were framed pictures of him with every
world leader who matters from Gorbachev
to the Daly Lama to the Pope to
everybody.
It's like, okay, kind of narcissistic,
but all right. He's a senator and a
presidential candidate and, you know,
big war hero.
I didn't even care about that. But you
walk into the office and immediately
next to the door there was a small
credenza. It had three things on it.
First, it had a framed picture of him
with John Lennon and they're like in
this weird embrace making funny faces
and like doing noogies, right? Very
cool. John Lennon, right? Beetle. Very
cool. On the other side of the credenza
was a picture of him with Peter Paul and
Mary, the the folk group from the 60s.
And he was close to them. He gave the
eulogy at Mary Travers funeral. I get
it. They're all from Massachusetts. But
in the middle was a shadow box and in it
had his silver star,
um his bronze stars and his purple
heart. Well, in 1972,
he famously threw his medals over the
White House fence to protest the Vietnam
War. It was national news that this hero
just came back from Vietnam, testified
before the Senate Armed Services
Committee, and in an act of defiance
threw his medals at Richard Nixon, you
know, over the White House fence.
So,
we agree I'm going to do the job. It's
going to be fun. He wants me to
investigate this, that, and the other
thing. I walk out.
The the staff director at Foreign
Relations Committee was a member of the
Kennedy family. So, we're walking out
and that was really my connection. I
knew him.
And uh he said, "So, it went well." And
I said, "Yeah, it went well. I'm I'm
gonna take the job. But I said, I got to
ask you, what's up with the medals? I
mean, everybody in America knows he
threw his medals over the White House
fence. He goes, "The medals?"
He didn't throw the medals over the
White House fence. He went to the PX and
bought copies of the medals and threw
the copies over the White House fence.
He goes, "Those medals are the most
important thing in his life."
He would never have thrown those medals
over the fence. I said, 'The entire John
Ky mystique is based on that one act of
defiance. He goes, "Yeah, well, welcome
to Washington."
>> You would think maybe you'd leave the
medals at home in a shadow box.
>> You think exactly
>> not in the office for everyone to see?
>> You know, he he was really very cold in
a in a patrician Yankee New England kind
of way. He had a Christmas party at his
house that year. That was Christmas of
'09. He lived in this rare single family
home in Georgetown that he later sold
for 12.5 million. Georgetown doesn't
have more than a small handful of single
family homes.
But he wouldn't allow anybody in the
house. It's December in Washington. It's
20°. So, it has a sideyard surrounded by
a brick wall. Um, and he just rented
these these propane heaters. So, we're
all standing out there
and um
and he says, "Well, we have a special
guest that's going to come to the party
tonight. We're all like, you know, this
trying to keep warm because these
heaters aren't doing the trick."
And then
and then Joe Biden comes. He was vice
president at the time. So Biden comes
and Biden was exactly the opposite of
Carrie. Biden's standing at the at the
entrance to the backyard or to the sidey
yard. He goes, "Hey."
Like this. Everybody's like, "Hey, Mr.
Vice President. Good to see you." So he
comes down and um starts shaking hands
with everybody one at a time. great eye
contact. Uh, hi Joe Biden. Tell me your
name again. You know, that kind of
thing.
I said, "Mr. Vice President, we've met a
number of times. You probably don't
remember me. I'm from Newcastle,
Pennsylvania, and my dad was best
friends with Angelo Sans." He goes,
"Angelo Sans from seventh grade?" And I
said, "Yeah, you're best friend from
seventh grade." He says, "I do remember
you. We talked about Angelo's a taxi
driver in Las Vegas now." I said,
"That's right. He is a taxi driver.
Great memory." I said, "That
conversation was 15 years ago.
And then he says to the guy next to me,
"I remember you. I don't like you." And
he looks at Carrie and he Carrie just
like like I don't like him either. And
they walk away. I said to the guy, "What
the fuck?"
He said, "Biden has hated me since I
told him in a memo that we should pull
out of Afghanistan."
And I said, "Sweethearts these guys
are." And he's like, "Yeah, well, what
are you going to do?"
Washington DC. Every man for himself.
Harry Truman once said, "If you want a
friend in Washington, buy a dog."
There it is. Did you have any other
occurrences? We talked about we talked
about your um
uh your meeting with Bill Clinton, but
Biden, did you have any other like funny
occurrences like that with any like
prominent world leaders or Oh, yeah. A
couple.
Yeah. The prime minister of the prime
minister of Bahrain did not like me. Not
even a little bit.
So I was the human rights officer for
the embassy and I took him to the
woodshed and you know I mean in a
perfect world it would have jeopardized
arm sales unless they would clean up
their act. So he had like surveillance
on me. I found a bug in my house. It was
bad.
So, Admiral Crowe, who who had been the
um chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, comes to Bahrain and they drew my
name out of the hat. So, I was going to
be Admiral Crow's control officer.
Control officer arranges all the
meetings, arranges the transportation,
serves as the notetaker in the meetings.
So, we go to see his majesty the Amir.
And the Amir was just the sweetest,
sweetest old guy you could ever
encounter. and we finish the meeting and
um
and we get up to walk out of the Amir's
Dwan, his his meeting room.
And as we get to the elevator, it's a
private elevator that goes straight from
the Amir's garage into the Dwan. The
elevator opens and the prime minister
walks out with the minister of interior.
Now, the minister of interior is the guy
I'm actually taking to the woodshed. The
minister of interior was also a prince
who was the prime minister's son-in-law,
right? So,
so I said, "Oh, I said, Admiral Cra,
this is his highness, uh, Amir, I'm
sorry, uh, Prince Khalifal Khalifa. He's
the the prime minister." And, uh, this
is his highness, you know, minister. I
forget what the minister's name was. He
was married to the prime minister's
daughter
and uh the prime minister shakes his
hand and then I said as I always said
it's such a pleasure to see you again
your highness and I shook his hand and
he wouldn't let my hand go and he's
smiling at me and the handshake becomes
more like deliberate like he will not
let my hand go
and so we're just standing there looking
at each other and he says I have my eye
on you, Kuryaku. And I said, "Yes, your
highness. I would expect nothing less."
And then I took my hand back. We got in
the elevator and Admiral Crowd looks at
me and the ambassador says, "What the
hell was that all about?" And I said,
"Last week they beat to death a
15year-old boy for marching in a
pro-democrac democracy demonstration."
And I've been talking to human rights
attorneys and saying, "I'm going to
write this up for the Human Rights
Report." and they don't like it. And I'm
bitching about it at parties and they
have my house bugged and they're
listening to me [__] about it at my
wife or to my wife
and I think that they just think that
that somehow is intimidating.
It's not. Well, when I left the country
a year later,
the Amir and the prime minister would
always give gifts to to the officers
leaving. We can never accept the gifts.
So, it's usually a Rolex. Usually when
the ambassador left, they they gave him
a cigar box and it he was like, "Oh,
cigars." And he opened it up in front.
We always had to open the gifts in in
the presence of a witness, right? Cuz
then you have to send the whole thing in
the diplomatic pouch to the Treasury
Department because you can't keep
anything worth more than $25.
So he opens the box and it's $50,000 in
cash.
And the ambassador's like, "I'm not
touching it." So the uh the DCM, the
deputy chief of mission and the head of
public affairs counted it like with the
w the rest of us as witnesses and then
we just boxed it back up and sent it to
treasury. So I was the only one the only
one who didn't get a Rolex when I left.
>> I thought you would have gotten to keep
it anyway.
>> Yeah, I couldn't have kept it anyway,
but you know.
>> So yeah, let's let's end it on a little
bit of a different note. So, uh, one of
the main comments on any YouTube video
that you are a part of is like how good
of a storyteller you are.
>> Oh, thank you.
>> Uh, rack on rackonour is the word that a
lot of people use. But
>> let's see if I can monetize that.
>> Yeah. Right. Um, but anyway, so what how
would you how would you recommend to
people to become more articulate, become
a better storyteller, and just like
speak well in general? How can people
get better at that?
>> That's a great question. Um,
I'll answer it by beginning with a
story.
My brother, my brother and I went out
one time. We were like in college, I
guess. We went out. Something happened.
I don't remember what. And we got home.
My mom said, "Oh, so how was it? How was
your afternoon?" I said, "Oh, listen to
this." And I told her what happened. My
brother goes, "That's not what
happened." I said, "That's exactly what
happened." He goes, "Yeah, but it wasn't
as interesting as that.
And I said, "It's not my fault that you
can't tell an interesting story."
Um,
I had a station chief. Well, he wasn't
my station chief. He was a buddy of mine
who was a station chief, and he asked me
to do an operation on his behalf because
it was too dangerous for him.
And I didn't live in that country, so I
would just go back and forth to do the
operation. And then I would go directly
from the meeting to the airport and fly
back to the United States. So I would do
the reporting cables from headquarters
and send them out to the field to him.
And he called me one day and he said, "I
so love your cables because I feel when
I'm reading them like I'm standing in
the room watching it go down." And I
said, "Man, that's the biggest
compliment anybody's ever paid me.
I I just enjoy telling stories. I think
everybody has great stories. And this is
why I've written this most recent series
of books. I I have the series of books
coming out soon on on cemeteries and
historic graves. I have one on the mafia
graves of New York City, for example,
because everybody's got a story to tell.
You don't have to be famous. You don't
have to be, you know, special in any
way. Everybody has a story. And so I
enjoy telling those stories.
There's no real trick to it to tell you
the truth. Just recount it as you recall
it. I try to be linear. I try to do it I
try to recount the story in the order in
which it happened. I I find that to be
helpful,
but there's otherwise no real trick to
it. So it sounds like storytelling is is
kind of like innate, but as far as uh it
is one thing to be articulate in my
position when I ask a a quick and
ideally direct question, but when you're
talking for 6 hours
>> and there's there's no ums, there's no
h. I say like a lot, which is bad.
There's none of that.
>> They say you know,
>> yeah, but that one I feel is acceptable.
So that specifically, is there something
like it is it reading? Is it like is it
doing the speaking as far as
repetitions? Like how can people build
that up?
>> I had a uh speech teacher in 10th grade,
Doc uh Dr. Scarell. He was my dad's best
friend growing up. In fact, he had a
glass eye. He and my dad when they were
9 years old went hunting for squirrels
in Frell, Pennsylvania. and Dr. Scarell
tripped on a log and dropped the the BB
gun and it went off and it shot his eye
out. And so my dad like carried him to
the nearest house. So when I went to the
class, he's like, "Are you Chris
Kuryaku's son?" I said, "Yeah." He said,
"You know, he was my best friend growing
up.
He was one of the toughest teachers I
ever had." And it was just speech and
debate.
And so
we started off with little things like
reading passages from a book. And I knew
I won him over. I still think about this
sometimes. He says, "Find a fiveinut
passage from a book and present it as a
talk." Right? You can read it. You don't
have to memorize it, but present it to
get us into the habit of not saying,
"Um, uh, well, uh,
so all these girls went before us, the
boys, and they're like, "This book is
about love.
This book is about
family." And it's like, "Ayay." I read a
passage from um
from Midnight Express, the book Midnight
Express about being beaten in a Turkish
prison. The whole thing was about this
beating that uh I forget his name now uh
got at the hands of these Turkish
jailers.
And he stood up and just started doing
this slow clap like this. and he's like
that that is what I wanted to hear. Brad
Davis. So, um
that that class that year taught me not
to stumble over my words.
If you need a filler, allow silence to
be the filler. There's nothing wrong
with that. You don't have to say, "Uh,
well, um, let me see. uh people hate
that. So just let silence fill the fill
the time. It doesn't it's not going to
harm you in any way. And then he's the
one who encouraged me to go into
competitive debate. And I ended up doing
really well in that. That's where you
have to think it. Mine was
contemporaneous debate. So you had to
think quickly on your feet. like you
you pull a topic out of a hat, you have
five minutes to prepare and then you go
on and just start fighting.
So that got me used to answering
questions without any real preparation.
And that lasted all through high school.
I I really credit him
with uh making me a speaker that I
became.
>> Well, yeah, dude. That'll do it. you
know, if you're it's like if you're they
say uh one one of the guys that I I
watch about um like how to get better at
shooting.
>> And uh basically they the the premise is
like you you push it as hard as you can
in training and like everybody wants to
leave the range with a fist-sized group,
but you don't learn anything from that.
You just know that that's how good you
can shoot. So it's like how do you you
want to learn how to drive 130 mph? What
do you do? You drive 200 miles an hour
so that you're comfortable in a podcast
when you've been in debates already.
That is exactly right.
>> Anything today that I didn't ask you
about that uh that you've thought of or
is top of mind or that you want to talk
to people about?
>> Dude, you have great questions all the
time. All the time. That's why I so
enjoy coming on this show. It's a great
conversation. I appreciate it.
>> Thank you.
>> If you'll let me too uh uh pitch a
couple things that I have going on.
>> Oh yeah.
>> I'm very proud to have two podcasts. One
is called Deprogram. It's with Ted Raw
and John Kuryaku. Uh we're going every
day starting next week at five o'clock
on YouTube and uh it's it's far more of
a
of a news show, but it's light at the
same time. Ted is a two-time Pulitzer
Prize finalist um editorial cartoonist.
And then I have another one called Deep
Focus with John Kuryaku. It's much more
in the weeds, in-depth news stuff. I
have great guests. I've been very
fortunate so far. I have um see and I'm
doing it saying um I have Roger Waters
next week from Pink Floyd. Roger's been
one of the most outspoken supporters of
Palestinian human rights and I'm proud
to call the man a friend. You know,
little secret about Roger Waters.
He anonymously
paid off my second mortgage when I went
to prison. Anonymously.
It was years before I found out that
Roger did it. Like magic, we get this
letter from the bank saying somebody had
paid off our second mortgage. So my wife
and kids didn't lose the house. Wow.
>> Mhm.
Yeah. One of the founders of Pink Floyd
and a giant in my mind. Mhm. Talk about
generous. I had never met the man,
but he followed my case, thought I did
the right thing, and put his money where
his mouth was.
>> All right, so Deep Program, Deep Focus,
and then the books as well.
>> A lot of books. Uh, I've written eight
books. The eighth is supposed to The
eighth was supposed to be out weeks ago.
I'm yelling at my publisher right now.
Uh, but I've got Well, some the first
the first one is out of print now. It
was
what was the name of my first book?
>> Uh, The Reluctant Spy.
>> The Reluctant Spy. Thank you. The
Reluctant Spy, My Secret Life in the CIA
war.
I can bang these. I don't sleep very
much, so I bang these things out. The
Reluctant Spy, My Secret Life in the in
the CIA's War and Terror. I I actually
made number five on the New York Times
bestsellers list with that.
>> It's a really good book.
>> Thank you. Thank you. And the second one
was Doing Time Like a Spy. How the CIA
taught me to survive and thrive in
prison. I won two literary awards for
that book.
>> Really?
>> I won the pen first amendment award uh
which is one of the big four with the
pen falner, the Pulitzer and the Edgar
Alan Poe. And I won the forward reviews
memoir of the year.
And then I did the convenient terrorist
uh Abuza and the weird wonderland of
America's secret prisons. Then I got a
whole bunch of books commissioned. I did
the CIA Insiders Guide to the Iran
Crisis, the CIA Insiders Guide to
Surveillance and Surveillance Detection,
The CIA Insiders Guide to Lying and Lie
Detection, and The CIA Insiders Guide to
Disappearing and Living Off the Grid.
And then I decided to start writing
books for myself. So, I wrote one called
Remains of the Day, the the the
Remains of the Day, the definitive guide
to Washington, DC's historic cemeteries,
which was supposed to be out weeks ago.
It's coming soon, but the editorial
board liked it so much they commissioned
four more. They wanted
the next one I'm halfway done with. It's
called Whispers in the Dirt. Um, the
definitive guide to New York City's mob
graves.
Then the historic cemeteries of Chicago,
the country western graves of Nashville,
and the graves of America's most
notorious serial killers,
so I'm trying to pump them out as fast
as I can.
>> Nice.
I love it, dude. I know. Uh,
>> thank you.
>> I know the Reluctant Spy. I've seen a
lot of my comments that it's tough for
people to get.
>> Yeah. I don't know why Random House
doesn't just do a second run. It
>> sucks because that's a really good one,
too.
>> You know, it's funny, too. The first two
books were translated into both Spanish
and Greek. They made number one, both of
them, on the Athens bestsellers list.
And then just two weeks ago, I got
another check from the Greek publisher
that it's going to a second printing.
So, they're still buying it in Greek. I
don't know why nobody cares in the
United States. You can't even find it on
eBay anymore. It's like a $100, $200.
It's nuts.
>> Just keep your eyes peeled for it,
folks. Maybe you might find one. But,
uh,
>> [__] dude. This is, uh, God. Every time
I I get to see you, I have so much fun.
And like, me, too. I always have a
blast.
>> And I know people enjoy it. So, dude,
like I could sit here and talk to you
for six hours.
>> I appreciate it.
>> We'll have to have you back. But, um,
>> love it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And and I just want to say I
wasn't planning on it, but we were
talking about a bit about it off camera
and I just feel like speaking to your
character because um like dude, you you
changed my life like with that very
first interview.
>> And I'll I'll keep this short, but dude,
like when when you and I met, I didn't
have a following. I didn't have a
podcast. I didn't even have a [__]
YouTube channel. Nothing. And what did
you do? But you drove here four hours
from DC. You sat with me for seven hours
and drove four back without so much as
asking like, "Hey, what's your
following? What's your exposure?"
>> Yeah.
>> I'm like, "Dude,
>> I met you at the Danny Jones podcast in
Tampa and we had such a good
conversation, especially at the airport
on the way back."
>> Yeah.
>> That when you asked me, I said, "I'd be
delighted to do it." And then actually
you changed my life because that
interview that you and I did was so long
and so extensive
that it came to the attention of a
speakers bureau in London that then
signed me for an around the world
speaking tour
that we're going to pick up again in
January. So good for us,
>> dude. You deserve it.
>> Yes you. You deserve success.
>> Thank you. And again, man, like I had I
had no following and almost we're coming
up on two years later. We're we're
coming up on 300,000 subscribers on the
channel and like things have been
incredible. So, and again, this show
would be nothing without the guest.
>> But dude, just just thank you. I felt
the need to say that on
>> Pleasure is all mine. Thanks.
>> You're the man. Um I'll see you again
soon.
>> I'm looking forward to it.
>> What's up, guys? Thank you so much for
taking the time to watch the interview.
If you got anything out of this video at
all, please like the video, leave me a
comment, tell me what you thought of the
video. Uh, tell me who you'd like to see
on the show. I really appreciate the
support. It goes a long way on these
platforms as you guys know. Most
importantly, I have some excellent
interviews coming up in the future that
I'm really, really excited about. So,
please subscribe to the channel so you
don't miss any of them. But that's it.
Thank you for your support. I really
appreciate it and hope to see you again
soon.